



^be iKIlorlD’s Clasatcs 


ccxxxi 

SPEECHES AND DOCUMENTS 

ON 


INDIAN POLICY 




SPEECHES & DOCUMENTS 

ON 

INDIAN POLIOY 

1750-1921 

EDITED BY 

PROFESSOR A. ‘BERRIEDALE KEITH 

D.C.L., D.LITT. 

IN TWO VOLUMES 

VOL. I 



HUMPHREY MILFORD 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

lONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW COPENHAGEN 
NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE CAPE TOWN 
BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS SHANGHAI 


This volume of ‘ Speeches and Documents on Indian Policy 
was first published in ^ The World* s Classics* in 1922, 


PKINTKI) IN KNflLANI) 

AT THF. OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
BY FREDERICK BALL 



PREFACE 


The elections to Indian legislative bodies at 
the end of 1920 mark a definite epoch in the 
history of the British Empire in India ; they 
signify the close of the period of the preparation 
of the people of India to take a decisive part in 
the moulding of their-own destinies, and herald 
the time when India will possess full autonomy 
and will rank as an equal with the Dominions 
and the United Kingdom itself as a member of 
the British Commonwealth. The assurance 
that this status would be attained at no distant 
date was the moving cause which induced the 
Allied and Associated Powers to accord to India 
full membership as a unit of the British Empire 
in the League of Nations, and, although some 
time must elapse before the goal is reached, 
the period may be almost indefinitely shortened 
if the Indian ministers, into whose hands the 
suffrage of the people entrusts the power con- 
ceded by the new constitution, display in the 
constructive work of administration the high 
qualities of statesmanship which the ability of 
their^ criticism on the old regime indicates 
them to possess. 

The grant of the constitution of 1919 was 
undoubtedly accelerated by the events of the 
European w^ar, for the loyalty of the Indian 
people to the cause of justice and liberty and 
the splendid services of the forces of India 
elicited a warm response from the people of the 
United Kingdom, and persuaded statesmen 



VI 


PREFACE 


thatj however strongly caution and delay 
appeal to the British temperament in matters 
political, there is a time when the true wisdom 
lies in a generous enthusiasm to incur risks in 
an honourable endeavour to meet legitimate 
aspirations. But the action of 1919 was only 
possible because it was the logical outcome of 
the whole trend of the exerciser of British 
sovereignty in India. As in Egypt, so in 
British India the aims orf the Ihitish Govern- 
ment have never been set mcTely on the 
maintenance of effective' administration and 
the just ('xercise of civil and criminal jurisdic- 
tion ; they have been directed, more or less 
consedously and more or less effectively from 
time to time, to ])roducing in India th(‘ measure 
of political ca[)acitv among its people which 
would rend('r it })ossible to entrust them with 
their own government with the assurance that 
no irrenuKliable ills would result. Tardy th(' 
iwocess may seem, but it behoves a statesman 
to remember that a fcM' decades are as nothing 
in the annals of a mighty nation, that the 
princi])les of constitutional liberty were of 
gradual aiul painful growth in the t'nited 
Kingdom itself, and that, transplanted to 
India, they were slow to take root in a s^)il at 
first cold and uncongenial to them. Nor may 
we forget that, if Englishmen have been found 
to deny the applicability of Parliamentary 
institutions to Indiii, there are Indians who 
hold that, as Indian art obeys canons of a 
higher spirituality and deeper significance than 
those of Western art, so the ancient polity 
of the Hindu kingdom — rude and barbarous a-s 



PREFACE 


vii 

Westerns deem it — represents the true ideal of 
Indian government. As often, extreme views 
meet and oppose a stubborn, if frequently 
unavowed, resistance to the realization of the 
essential fact that, while the past has its lessons 
for us, we cannot hope to meet the needs of 
the future by the vain effort to restore an • 
ancient order which has fulfilled its purpose, 

yielding place to new 

Lest one good custom should corrupt the world. 

However this may be, it is at least certain 
that the position of India, at the moment when 
the officers of the East India Company began 
the process which was not to end until the 
British Crown exercised sovereignty or suze- 
rainty over all but an insignificant portion of 
the peninsula, was far removed from either 
the ideal period of Hindu rule or even the 
effective, if somewhat crude, administration 
established by the wisdom and tolerance of 
the great Akbar. The austere fanaticism of 
Aurangzeb shattered the possibility of the 
maintenance of an Empire based on the 
loyalty of Mahomedan and Hindu alike ; long 
before the death of the aged Emperor in 1707, 
the formidable army created by Akbar had 
declined from its military prowess, and the 
forces of the Mogul were unfit to reduce to 
obedience the Mahrattas. Under his degenerate 
successors the ruin of the Empire proceeded 
with ever-increasing rapidity, and in 1739 Nadir 
Shah of Persia sacked Delhi, the Imperial 
city, and wrested Afghanistan from the crown 
of Hindostan. The Mahrattas aspired to 
‘ seize the power from the nerveless hands of 



PREFACE 


viii 

the house of Timur, but their loose confederacy 
met with such disaster at Panipat from the 
Afghan chief, Ahmad Shah, in 1761 , that the 
dream of a Mahratta empire of India perished 
for ever. Amid the confusion the Nawabs, 
or vice-gerents, disregarded more and more 
openly the nominal obedience which they owed 
to the Em])eror, and European adv-enturers 
were encouraged to seek profit from the 
prevalent anarchy. The brilliance of the 
success of Dupleix in his intervention in the 
politics of Southern India, which brought with 
it a commercial monopoly, in the ])eriod 
from 174S-51 stirred the representatives of 
the East India Company to emulation, and 
the military ability of Robert Olive secured 
British predominance in the Carnatic. In 
Bengal the same result was the outcome of the 
hostility of the young Nawab Siraju-d daula, 
whose attack on Cahuitta, followed by the tragic 
episode of the Black Hole, excited in the French 
Governor at (/handernagore the ho])e that 
utter ruin had befallen the English Company’s 
venture in Bengal. The anticipation was 
falsified, and, though peace for the moment 
was patched up between the Company and the 
Nawab, suspicion of French intrigues was tme 
of the causes which led to the decisive victory 
of Plassey, and the appointment as Nawab of 
Mir Jafar in 1757. 

The intervention of the servants of the 
Company, at first sight remarkable in the 
agents of a trading company, becomes less 
strange when it is remembered that the nature 
of the enterprises undertaken by the Company » 



PREFACE ix 

compelled its emissaries to provide themselves 
with troops and fortified places, and that 
Charles II had conferred upon them the right 
of carrying on war with local powers in case of 
need. But the exercise of delegated powers 
of sovereignty had hitherto been restricted, 
and it was characteristic of the genius of Clive 
that in 1759 he urged upon Pitt the merits of ob- 
taining from the Emperor a grant of sovereign 
authority over Bengal, a proposal which even 
the commanding spirit of that statesman was 
fain to discourage. The result was untoward ; 
Mir Jafar as a puppet of the Company 
was powerless to check its servants in their 
career of enrichment, and in 1760 gave way to 
Mir .Kasim, This Nawab, more able and 
energetic than his predecessors, sought in vain 
to introduce reforms in the administration, but 
was met by the imifiacable hostility of the 
(Jalcutta Council to any measures likely to 
interfere with the conduct of the private trade 
whence, as a result of the miserable emoluments 
of their official positions, their fortunes were 
derived. The intolerable claim was persisted 
in that this private trade must bo exempt 
from any dues, and, when Mir Kasim, in 
justice to the Indian traders, cancelled the 
dues levied on their trade also, the Council, 
des23ite the protests of the President Van- 
sittart and Warren Hastings, then Kesident 
at Kasimbazar, demanded their reimposition. 
The ghastly massacre of almost all the Euro- 
peans in his power by which the distracted Na- 
wab met this unjust demand was decisively re- 
venged by Major Munro at Buxar on 23 October, 

A 3 



X PREFACE 

1764, when the forces of the Nawab, and 
of the Nawab of Oudh, the Vizier of the 
Emperor Shah Alam, were utterly routed. 
The Company, however, recognized the gravity 
of the situation in regard to the misgovernment 
of Bengal, and dispatched Clive, now a baron 
in the peerage of Ireland, to inaugurate 
reforms. (.!live, however, had receded from the 
standpoint of 1759, and no longer cont(unplated 
the exercise of sovereignty by the ('ompany ; 
the stubborn resistance of Mir Kasim’s forces 
at Buxar had im])ressed upon him the danger 
lest ‘ the natives, left without European allies, 
would find in their own resources means of 
carrying on war against us in a much more 
soldierly manner than they ever thought of 
when their rcdiancK* on Europ(‘an allies encou- 
raged their natural indolence His measures, 
therefore, were half-hearted ; the Emperor, 
who, after Buxar, liad accepted a position of 
dependeiic‘(‘ on the Company, was induced to 
grant to the Company the Diwani, or right of 
collecting the revenues of Bengal, Behar, and 
Orissa, in return for an annual giant of 26 
lacs and the assignment of the districts of 
Allahabad and Kora, which the Nawab of 
Oudh was rc^quired to surrender. As Mir 
Jafar, who had replaced Mir Kasim as Nawab 
of Bengal, was dead and his successor a mere 
boy, the Company, which was entitled under 
the Imperial grant to assume direct control of 
the collection of the revenue and the civil 
jurisdiction connected with it, might easily 
have stood forward as effective rulers of 
Bengal. But the fatal plan was adopted of 



PREFACE 


xi 


evading direct responsibility ; the military 
and police jurisdiction of the Nawab was 
entrusted to a deputy of the Nawab, Mu- 
hammad Raza Khan, while the duties of the 
Diwani were divided between that officer for 
Bengal, and a Hindu, Maharaja Shitab Rai, 
for Behar. No really effective steps were 
taken to secure the cultivators from excessive 
taxation, and Parliament tacitly connived at 
the misgovernment by requiring in 1767 an 
annual payment of £400,000 from the Company 
as the price of permission to remain in posses- 
sion of the territories acquired by it in India. 

The Directors, conscious of the growing 
evils of a system whose worst effects became 
more obvious after Clivers return in 1767, 
sought to check exactions by the appointment 
in 1769 of supra visors, but the remedy was 
inadequate, and the terrible famine of 1770, 
which reduced by a third the population of 
Bengal, brought home to the Directors, who 
had to ask for a remission of the pay mem t due 
to the government, the necessity of a vital 
change, at the same time as it impressed upon 
Parliament the necessity of taking further 
measures regarding the control of the territories 
whose acquisition by the Company necessarily 
brought them under the sovereign authority 
of the Crown. The Directors instructed Warren 
Hastings to assume the Presidency in Bengal, 
while under North’s Act of 1773 he became in 
1774 Governor-General with some measure of 
authority over the administrations at Madras 
and Bombay, though subject to the control 
of a Council which devoted its energies to 



PREFACE 


xii 

hampering and thwarting him, until the death 
of Colonel Monson in 1776 enabled him by the 
use of his casting vote to secure the acceptance 
of his policy. The st^r vices rendered by Warren 
Hastings, despite innumerable dilhculties, were 
of the highest merit and assured the foundation 
of the British dominion in India. Averse from 
])rojects of conquest, he yet designed the 
establishmc'iit of British influence throughout 
India ; he assumed full responsibility for the 
whole administration of B('ngal, and impressed 
on his subordinates that they owed a duty to 
the peojde wliose affairs they atlministered 
paramount to all private intert'st. H(‘. estab- 
lished courts for the du(‘ administration of 
both civil and criminal justice, ami he was 
the first to recognize the claims of Hindu 
and Mahrmu'dan law to be respec^ted in the 
administration of justice. In his I’cwenue 
administration he adopted the ])i’ineiple 
of maki]ig a detailed assessment based on 
carcdul inquiry in each district, and, while 
giving se<*urity to the Zemindars who farmed 
the revenue, by fixing the assessment for five 
velars he conferred on the ryots, who were the 
actual cultivators, the protection of formal 
contracts, to save them from thc^ variable and 
exeessix'e exactions to which tlu^y had hitherto 
been exposed. 

Hastings had deserved well alike of the 
Company, the British Govc^rnment, and the 
pt'ople of India ; he had restored the finances 
of the Company, had established British power 
in India, and had aimed at a just and impartial 
rule. But the means at his disposal were 



PREFACE 


xiii 

scanty, his colleagues refractory, his opponents 
versed in Eastern statecraft, and he had at times 
recourse to methods unworthy of the high 
principles by which his actions were guided 
uTider normal conditions. These errors, mag- 
nified by the malignance of Francis and by 
])ersona] jealousy, availed to deprive him of the 
honours which had been the just reward of his 
illustrious services, and to involve him in the 
cruel delays of an impeachment which, begun on 
13 February, 1788, ended on 23 April, 1795, by 
his honourable acquittal. No candid judgement 
can deny tli(^ justice of the decision of the House 
of Lords : no one can excuse the intolerable 
delays of a trial which proved that the weapon 
of impeachment had grown too rusty for modern 
usc^. But there is a side to the problem which 
the vindicators of Hastings are ]7rone to over- 
look. kSpecific and grave charges were alleged 
against him, which it was only right that a court 
of justice should sift, and, although the accused 
was guiltless of the crimes alleged against him, 
the burning eloquence of Burke remains a noble 
monument of the principle that British rule, 
even in the remotest lands, must rest on im- 
partial justice, and that the exercise of sovereign 
power is justifiable only in so far as it aims at 
the good of the subjects to whom it extends. 

The rivalry of Hastings’s colleagues with the 
Governor-General had been of value in focussing, 
more and more closely the attention of Parlia- 
ment on India, and Pitt’s Act of 1784 asserted 
in the clearest manner the right of the British 
Government to control Indian policy by sub- 
jecting the Directors to the supervision of a 



XIV 


PREFACE 


new department of state, the Board of Control. 
In 1793 this department, hitherto under a 
Secretary of State, was reorganized by the 
appointment of a President, who became the 
minister responsible to Parliament for the 
conduct of British relations with India. The 
Company retained the right of making appoint- 
ments, but the Board might recall any officer 
from India. It was declared, that to pursue 
schemes of conquest in India was contrary to 
the wish, the honour, and the policy of the 
nation, and aggressive wars were forbidden save 
with the cons(int of the (V>ui*t. of Directors or its 
Secret Committee. Paiiianumt thus disavowed 
ideas of dominion, ])ut facts proved too strong 
to be rt;sisted. Lord Cornwallis redeemed the 
surrender of Yorktown by th(* overthrow of 
Tiy)u Sahib, who had usur])ed the throne of 
Mysore, at Seringapatam, and concluded in 1792 
a* defensive alliance with the Mahrattas and the 
Nizam of Hyderabad, in order to secure the 
three powers the ])eaceful enjoyment of the 
cessions of territory which they had imposed on 
Tipu. (Vrnvvallis, however, was anxious to 
conform to the dc‘sire of the Company, and 
devoted much care to internal reforms. He 
succeeded in s(*curing adequate salaries for the 
Company’s servants, who, relieved from the 
necessity of se('king illegitimate gains, developed 
a high degree of etUciency and devotion to duty ; 
and he carried out, partly on lines yjlaimed by 
Hastings, a series of judicial reforms, under 
which criminal jurisdiction was transferred to 
British hands, civil jurisdiction was separated 
from revenue administration, and an elaborate 



PREFACE 


XV 


system of local courts was called into being. 
His judicial changes were only partly successful 
in achieving their objects. Cornwallis had an 
exaggerated distrust of the exercise of criminal 
jurisdiction by Indian officials, and it was found 
necessary in 1835 to restore to the collectors the 
magisterial powers of which he had deprived 
them in deference to the doctrine of the separa- 
tion of powers. The achievement normally 
associated with his name, the permanent settle- 
ment of Bengal, is now generally admitted 
to have been a serious error ; under it the 
Zemindars, whose office of tax collector had 
often become hereditary, were converted into 
landholders, and the actual cultivators of the 
land degraded into the position of tenants. 
The same conservatism in Cornwallis’s dis- 
position induced him to support the desire of 
the Company to secure in 1793 the renewal for 
a further period of twenty years of the monopoly 
of trade granted in 1773, while the govern- 
ment had already shown their appreciation of 
his services by accepting the advice, which 
Warren Hastings had vainly urged uyjon them, 
and by securing an amendment to the Act of 
1784 empo)vering the Governor -General to 
override the views of his Council, if on mature 
deliberation he deemed it necessary to do so. 

Cornwallis’s successor. Sir John Shore, obeyed 
to the letter the injunction to avoid interference 
in Indian politics, and permitted the Nizam to 
suffer defeat in 1795 at the hands of the Mah- 
rattas, while his tame surrender to the mutinous 
demands of the military officers induced the 
Company to secure his recall. Lord Wellesley, 



XVI 


PREFACE 


who took his place in 1798, adopted with the 
doubtful approval of the Directors a course 
diametrically opposed ; the Nizam, who had 
fallen under French influence, was recalled to his 
allegiance ; Tipu Sahib for the same reason was 
attacked and killed in 1799, and a scion of the 
former line placed in subordinate alliance on the 
throne of Mysore. The territories of Arcot and 
Tanjorewere annexcHl bvagre(unent,and the Car- 
natic was a])propriated, again on the ground of 
disloyalty. The Nawab of Oudh was com]xdled 
to cede valuable territories, now included in the 
Province of Agra, in the same year. The 
Mahrattas remained the only serious encmiy, but 
internal disunion paralysed their efforts ; mili- 
tary operations of great brilliance forced the 
Peshwa in 1802, the Bhonsla Raja of Rerar and 
Nagpur and Sindia in 1803, to a(*ce])t the terms 
imposed by the Governor-General. Holkar, 
who remained recalcitrant, met with severe 
defeats in 1804 ; but a rash attack on Bharatpiir 
failed in 1805, and the Directors had already 
tired of th(' new policy, and had secured the 
rf'call of th(‘ too ardent Wellesley. Despite his 
devotion to his ]jlan of establishing the British 
power as paramount in India, Wellesley was not 
unmindful of the needs of the civil administra- 
tion ; he laid great stress on the establishment 
of a college at Calcutta for the training of 
the civil servants of the government, recognizing 
that the demands on their talents were such as 
to require specialized preparation for the 
performance of their duties: The Directors 
vetoed his iwoposal, but in 1809 the East India 
Company’s College at Haileybury came into 



PREFACE 


xvii 


being with a curriculum of studies such as 
Wellesley had foreshadowed. The Governor- 
General also never failed to appreciate the 
relation of India to the war with France ; his 
prescience secured the refusal to surrender 
Pondicherry during the brief interludes of the 
treaty of Amiens, and Indian troops dispatched 
by him arrived in Egypt in 1801 prepared to 
take part in the operations which had just 
terminated against the Fremli invaders, an 
episode without i)arallel until Indian troo})s 
were brought to Malta in 1878 to support Lord 
Beaconsfield’s diplomacy against Russia, and 
until Indian troops landed in France in 1914. 

Cornwallis, sent out again to restore the policy 
of inactivity, died shortly after his arrival, but 
the policy of t he Direct ors was faithfully observed 
by Sir George Barlow, who assumed office as 
senior member of Council and tried to preserve 
X)eace with the Mahrattas by undertaking to 
permit them to deal at their pleasure with the 
Rajput states. A more worthy spirit was shown 
by Lord Minto, who sought by the dispatch of 
envoys to Persia, Afghanistan, and to Amritsar, 
to counteract the possibilities of French intrigue ; 
the failure of the first two of these missions was 
redeemed by the success of Charles Metcalfe, 
who procured in 1809 the assent of Maharaja 
Ran jit Singh to a treaty extending British 
jDOwer from the Jumna to the Sutlej. Forces 
based on India reduced Mauritius, the Mo- 
luccas, and Java, and the internal administra- 
tion reflected the prudence of the Governor- 
General so effectively that the Select Committee 
of the House of Commons which reported on the 
state of Indian affairs in 1812, in anticipation of 



xviii PJREFACE 

th(' expiry of the term granted to the Company in 
1793, came without hesitation to the conclusion 
that ‘ the dominion exercised by the East India 
Company has on the whole been beneficial to 
the natives’. The inevitable v result followed in 
the renewal of the governing powers of the 
Company for a further period of twenty years. 
Its commercial monopoly, save as regards the 
tea trade, was withdrawn ; but Lord Grenville’s 
proposal that the Crf)wn should assume direct 
control, and the civil service be recruited by a 
limited competition among nominees of the 
public schools, was rejected by a Parliament 
reluctant to deal with the vexed questiem of 
patronage. The admission of missionaries, a 
grave (juestion on which Minto had expressed 
strong views, was hotly debated, and finally 
conceded subject to licence, while the appoint- 
ment of a Bishop of Calcutta and three arch- 
deacons paid from Indian funds marked the 
recognition of the justice of securing the due 
administration of s])iritual benc^fits to the British 
population. 

The Mahrattas still rcmiained in large measure 
indejjendent, while disorder was spread in 
Hindostan by wandering hordes of Pathans and 
Pindaris, armed robbers, whose incursion into 
British territory in 1812 had roused the anxiety 
of Minto and the Directors. A further Pindari 
raid in 1816 was the prelude to the wars con- 
ducted under the orders of Minto’s successor, 
the Marquess of Hastings, which resulted in 
1817-19 in the overthrow of the Bhonsla Raja 
and the annexation of part of his territory, the 
chastisement of Sindia and Holkar, and the 



PREFACE 


XIX 


extinction of the political power of the Peshwa. 
Within the limit of India proper the paramount 
power of the British was now established, though 
the boundaries of India were to be enlarged in 
1843 by the annexation of Sind, without adequate 
justification, and by the taking over of the Pun- 
jab in 1849, after two wars had proved that 
peace could not otherwise be attained. British 
sovereignty was further extended, in the main 
by Lord Dalhousie, through the application of 
direct British rule to territories on the failure 
of Jegitimate heirs, while the insensate arrogance 
of the kings of Burma resulted in large cessions 
of their dominions in 1826 and 1852. The loyal 
alliance of Nepal was secured in 1816 on just and 
equitable terms. Very different results were 
attained by the policy of intervention in 
Afghanistan to which Lord Auckland was moved 
in 1838 by fears of Russian intrigue, and his 
successor. Lord Ellenborough, wisely abandoned 
in 1842 an intervention which had cost the 
British arms the most serious defeat ever inflicted 
u])on them in India. 

The establishment of Britain as the para- 
mount power was accompanied by marked 
indications of growing enlightenment of policy ; 
the settlement methods of Cornwallis were 
rejected by Elphinstone in Bombay after the 
Peshwa’s downfall, by Metcalfe at Delhi, and by 
Munro in Madras, all of whom adopted methods 
based on the desire to respect the indigenous 
customs which Cornwallis had ignored. To 
Lord William Bentinck as Governor-General from 
1828-35 belongs the credit of facing honestly 
the obligation of seeking the moral improve- 



XX 


PREFACE 


ment of the people, while respecting their 
religious beliefs. The difficulty of the position 
is exposed in his famous minute on the suppres- 
sion of Sati, on which after deep thought he 
boldly resolved despite the advice of many 
experienced administrators. In the case of 
Thuggee, with the abolition of which Sir Wil- 
liam Sle(‘man‘s name is inseparably connected, 
th(^ practices of th(^ stranglers who immolated 
their victims in hoiiour of Kali had not the 
sanction of antiquity or of the lawgivers of the 
j)ast. Bentinck also had tln^ wisdom to realize 
that both financial considerations and the 
dictates of justice requirc^d that Indians should 
be freely admitted into the public service ; the 
system inaugurabnl by (brnwallis was largely 
recast ; Indians w(T(‘ readily ax>pointed to 
executive and judicial office as subordinate 
judges ; th(‘ jirovineial courts which had jiroved 
cumbrous and usi'less were abolished ; certain 
judicial duti('s were im])osed on collectors of 
revenue, and the office of district magistrate 
combined with that of collector; (bmmissioners 
of Revenue and Circuit w’ere established, save 
in Madras, to supiTvise and co-ordinate the 
work of collectors in their vaiious functions, and 
the system of Boards of Revenue was extended 
by the creation of one at Allahabad. The 
scheme of administration thus assumed largely 
the form which it has since x^reserved, and, 
though now cajiable of improvement, un- 
doubtedly it long served effectively the ends of 
its creators. 

The Birectors in their selection of Bentinck 
had not been unmindful of the importance of 



PREFACE 


xxi 

satisf 3 nng Parliament of their care for the pro- 
gress of India, and they were rewarded by the 
favourable views of the Parliamentary Com- 
mittee which reported in 1833 on the affairs of 
the Company. The Committee laid down as ‘ an 
indisputable principle that the interests of the 
native subjects arc to be consulted in preference 
to those of Europeans, whenever the two come 
in competition and they pressed for the 
r( ‘(cognition of Indian law, and the extension of 
the employment of Indians in all the branches 
of th(^ Company's service. Parliament in 1833 
gave effect to their recommendations ; the 
Company ceased to be permitted to engage in 
trade, and became merely an agency for the 
government of India ; th(‘ ])aramount position 
of th(} British was recognized by the change of 
the Governor-Generars designation to Governor- 
General of India, and the number of the Council, 
fixed at three in 1784, was increased by the 
addition of a Lcigal Member, charged with the 
codification of Indian laws. To the Governor- 
General in the augmented Council was given the 
sole power of legislation for India, to the 
supersession of the right of issuing regulations 
possessed by the governments of Bengal, Madras, 
and Bombay under George I’s charter in 1726 
and the Act of 1813, a measure rendered 
expedient inter alia by the decision to permit 
the free entry of British subjects into India. On 
Macaulay, whose exposition of the Bill of 1833 
in the House of Commons is an excellent example 
of his more subdued eloquence, fell the duties of 
Legal Member of Council ; his work in codifica- 
tion bore fruit later in the Penal Code and the 



PREFACE 


±xii 

codes of Civil and Criminal Procedure, but his 
influence was more immediately felt in the 
sphere of education. As early as the Act of 1813 
a lac of rupees annually had been destined for 
' the revival and improvement of literature, 
and the encouragement of the learned natives 
of India, and for the introduction and pro- 
motion of a knowledge of the sciences among 
the inhabitants of the British territories in 
India but disputes as to the objects on which 
it should be expended had been in progress 
between those who advocated the claims of 
Sanskrit and Arabic and the supporters of 
Western learning. Macaulay with a profound 
ignorance of the classical languages of India 
pronounced in favour of the Anglicists, and 
Bentinck’s resolution of 7 March, 1835, secured 
for English the position of the oflicial and 
literary language of Indian government, while 
the simultaneous foundation of the Calcutta 
Medical College opened the way to the assimila- 
tion by India of Western scientifle methods, 
which were to enrich in due courses the world of 
scientific thought. Bentinck had shown great 
consideration in his exercise of control over the 
Indian press, and Sir Charles Metcalfe, who acted 
as Governor-General on his retirement, abolished 
all restrictions on its activity. Thus the press 
remained free until 1878, when Lord Lytton’s 
government found it necessary to impose 
restrictions — \\ithdra\\m in 1882 — on the ver- 
nacular press, while the growth of sedition 
evoked further legislation in 1908, 1910, and 
during the War. 

Lord Auckland’s regime wasted its strength 



PREFACE 


xxiii 


in the folly of the war with Afghanistan, but 
Lord Ellenborough’s colleagues secured the 
abolition in 1843 of the legal status of slavery 
in India. While avoiding social disturbance Sir 
Henry Hardinge’s overthrow of the Sikhs was 
accompanied by efforts to induce the Native 
States to put an end both to Sati and infanticide, 
while a campaign was set on foot against the 
human sacTifices practised in the hill tracts of 
Orissa. The efficiency of the administration 
steadily improved, and in 1853 Parliament 
extended the Company ’.s rule without specifica- 
tion of date, at the same time opening to com- 
petition the covenanted civil service, providing 
for a provincial administration in Bengal, and 
adding two judges, and four representatives of 
the local governments of Madras, Bombay, 
Bengal, and Agra, to the legislative Council of 
the Governor-General, while the Legal Member 
was admitted to meetings of the Executive 
Council of the Governor-General. Dalhousie’s 
activity covered every branch of adminis- 
tration : an efficient Public Works Depart- 
ment was created, roads constructed, rail- 
ways begun, the electric telegraph installed, 
irrigation promoted, and cheap postal rates 
introduced. Reforms were inaugurated in 
prison administration and effective attention 
paid to vernacular education. The annexation 
of the Punjab, of Oudh, of Nagpur, and of other 
minor territories consolidated British India, 
while an admirably conducted campaign added 
Pegu to the Empire. 

The complacency with which Dalhousie 
reviewed the events of his eight years of work in 



XXIV 


PREFACE 


1856 on quitting office proved to be painfully 
unjustified. The mutiny of the Bengal army 
in 1857, supported by elements of the civil 
population, proved that the Company's adminis- 
tration, despite its merits, had failed to keep 
in cfiective touch with Indian opinion. The 
changes which ensued on the restoration of 
order were motived by the recognition of this 
cardinal error. In the first yfiace, the direct 
responsibility of the Crown for the government 
of India was avoweel, and the immediate 
sovei(*ignty of the Queen received on i January, 
1877, formal recognition \)y th(* assumption of 
the ‘title of Em]>r(^ss of India. Th(‘ j^rotests of 
the .Directors against the extinction of their 
crmtrol, ably presented in their ])etition to 
Parliament, vvure brushed aside by the? Prime 
Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer 
in their support of the Covernment of India Bill. 
Secondly, the national sentiment of India was 
respected by the decision to avoid any extension 
of the area of direct British control in India ; on 
the other hand, the government ceased to 
remain indifferent to the character of the 
administration of the Native States, and its 
suzerain powers were usc il to encourage that 
development of effective government Avhich has 
honourably distinguished these territories . My - 
sore, under direct administration from 1831-81, 
was rendered in the latter year to the rule of 
the Maharaja, and the effective loyalty of that 
state, of Hyderabad, and of the other Native 
States was brilliantly displayed in the Euro- 
pean u ar. In the third place, the necessity was 
recognized of securing a wider measure of 



PREFACE 


XX \r 


co-operation, both Indian and European, in the 
framing of legislative measures. ‘ It is a great 
evil ’, Sir Bartle Frere wrote in 1860, ‘ of the 
present system that Government can rarely 
learn how its measures will be received, or how 
they are likely to affect even its European 
subjects, until criticism takes the form of 
settled and often bitter opposition.’ 

The development, however, of the plan of 
securing more effective Indian aid in govern- 
ment was hampered at the outset by unexpected 
difficulties. The Mutiny had emphasized the 
necessity of a strong government, and there was 
reluctance to take any measure likely to weaken 
it by division of authority, while the Legislative 
Council established in 1853 had shown a tendency 
to convert itself into a replica of Parliament and 
to claim control of the executive. The Indian 
Councils Act of 1861, therefore, while expanding 
the Governor-Generars Legislative Council and 
restoring legislative powers to the provinces, 
limited their authority to legislation only. To 
Lord Dufferin belongs the credit of recognizing 
the need of advance, and a more generous 
measure was passed in 1892, which opened the 
way to the presence of elective members by 
sanctioning the making of rules allowing 
representative bodies in India to elect candidates 
for nomination by the government. The powers 
of the Councils were also increased by permitting 
members to ask questions and allowing a discus- 
sion, though not voting, on the budget. The re- 
forms of Lord Mintoand Lord Morley were evoked 
by the growth of political aspirations in India, 
favoured by the result of the Russo-Japanese 



XXVI 


PREFACE 


war of 1904-5, and by the disconcerting realiza- 
tion that the government had been unable to fore- 
see the deep irritation which would be produced 
by such measures as the Universities Act of 1904, 
and the partition of Bengal in the following year. 
The Act of 1909 made discussion on the budgets 
real by permitting divisions, conceded the right 
of moving resolutions, and permitted supple- 
mentary questions ; it also opened the way to 
a reconstruction of (he j>ersonnel of the Councils, 
under which that of Bengal had an elective 
majority, those of the other provinces had non- 
otiicial majorities, and only on the Governor- 
GeneraFs Council was an official majority 
retained. At the same time, however, insistence 
was laid on the doctrine that the powers of the 
government must not be weakened ; Parlia- 
mentary government was ruled to be inapplic- 
able as yet to India and any intention to intro- 
duce* it was disclaimed, llie concessions were 
followed in 1911 by the King Emperor’s visit to 
India, and his announcement of the reversal of 
the jjolicy of the partition of Bengal and of the 
creation of Delhi as the Imperial capital, both 
acts destined as grac;eful recognitions of the 
continuity of Indian history. 

The anticipations of 1909 have been far out- 
stri])ped by events. A shortsighted insistence 
on form had excluded India from the right of 
membership of the Imperial Conference when 
the constitution of that body w^as framed in 
1907 ; but, when the meetings of the Imperial 
War Cabinet were summoned in 1917 and 1918, 
India, including the Native States, was accorded 
full membership both in the Cabinet meetings 



PREFACE 


XXVll 


and in the War Conferences held simultaneously. 
India also was granted the right of representa- 
tion by a special delegation at the Peace 
Conference of 1919, and the treaties of peace 
were signed separately for India, to which was 
accorded full membership as part of the Empire 
in the League of Nations. In internal matters 
the necessity of creating electorates and training 
ministers in administration has prevented the 
immediate grant of complete Dominion self- 
government ; but, even if we may hold that a 
fuller measure of responsibility might have 
immediately been confeiTcd on ministers, the 
fact remains that a sure path is now open by 
which the goal of complete autonomy within 
the Empire may be attained, and the British 
dominion in India fulfil the assurance of Sir 
Thomas Munro in 1824 that ‘ if wo pursue 
steadily the proper measures, we shall in time so 
far improve the character of our Indian subjects 
as to enable tliem to govern and y)rotect them- 
selves This dictum of one of the ablest of 
Indian administrators reminds us that India 
cannot attain full self-government until the 
Indian army is pn^pared, without British aid, to 
maintain internal order and repel the attacks of 
frontier tribes, and the creation of such a force 
must inevitably occupy a considerable period 
and involve close and cordial co-operation be- 
tween the British and Indian governments and 
peoples. 


A. BERRIEDALE KEITH. 




CONTENTS TO VOL. I 


PAGE 

PREFACE V 

I. THE EAST INDIA COMPANY AND THE FOUN- 
DATION OF BRITISH INDIA, 1750-1858 


1. The French Council at Chandernagore to the 

Superior Council in the Isle of Prance, 

16 December, 1756 .... 3 

2. Colonel Clive to the Secret Committee of the 

Directors, 26 July, 1757 ... 6 

3. Colonel Clive to the Right Hon. William Pitt, 

7 January, 1759 ..... 13 

4. The Directors to Lord Clive, 26 April, 1765 19 

5. Firman from Shah Alam granting the Diwani 

of Bengal, Behar, and Orissa to the East 
India Company, 12 August. 1765 . . 20 


6. Treaty between the Nawab Shujau-d daula, of 

Oudh, the Nawab Najmu-d daula, of 
Bengal, and the East India Company, 

16 August, 1765 28 

7. East India Company Act, 1767 (7 Goo, 3, 

c. 57) 30 

8. Warren Hastings to the Court of Directors, 

11 November, 1773 . . . .34 

9. East India Company Act, 1773 (13 Geo. 3, 

c. 63) 45 

10. Warren Hastings to Lord Mansfield, 21 March, 

1774 . 


60 



XXX 


CONTENTS 


11. Warren Hastings to Laurence Sullivan, 21 

March, 1776 

12. Warren Hastings to Alexander Elliot, 12 

January, 1777 

13. East India Company Act, 1784 (24 Geo. 3, 

sess. 2, c. 25) . . . . 

14. Edmund Burke on the Impeachment of 

Warren Hastings. 15-19 February, 1788 

15. Earl Cornwallis to l/he Court of Directors, 

2 August, 1789 . . . . . 

16. Fail Cornwallis to the Court of Directors, 

6 March, 1793 . 

17. The Marcpiess Wellesley to the Court of 

Directors, 9 July, 1800 .... 

18. The Marcpicss of Hastings to the (Jourt of 

Directors, 8 February, 1818 . 

19. Lord William Bentinck on the Suppression of 

Sati, 8 November, 1829 

20. 3'honias Babington Macaulay, House of 

Commons, 10 July, 1833 

21. (»ov(Tnmcnt of India Act, 1833 (3 & 4 Will. 4, 

c. 85) 

22. Sir Charles Napier on the Occupation of Sind, 

17 October, 1842 ..... 

23. The Earl of Dalhousie, 28 February, 1 856 

24. Petition from the East India Company to 

Parliament, February 1858 . 

25. Viscount Palmerston, House of Commons, 12 

February, 1858 ..... 

26. Sir George Cornewall Lewis, House of 

Commons, 12 Februai*y, 1858 . 


PAGE 

66 

82 

95 

114 

155 

166 

179 

198 

208 

226 

266 

274 

284 

298 

319 

342 



CONTENTS 


XXXI 


27. Robert Vernon Smith, House of Commons, 

16 February, 1858 .... 

28. Government of India Act, 1858 (21 & 22 Viet. 

c. 106) 

29. Proclamation by the Queen to the Princes, 

Chiefs, and the Peojdeof India, I Novem- 
ber, 1858 ...... 


PAGE 

355 

370 

382 




I 

THE EAST INDIA COMPANY AND 
THE FOUNDATION OF BRITISH 
INDIA, 1750-1858 


231 


B 




1 . The French Council at C handernagore to 
the Superior Council in the Isle of France, 
16 December 1756 

We think, gentlemen, you will be astonished to 
learn the principal circumstances of the revolution 
which has just driven the English from all their 
Settlements in Bengal. We will give you a very 
brief account of them. 

The Nawab, Siraj-uddaula, having, contrary to 
every one’s expectation, succeeded his grandfather 
Aliverdikhan, in the month of April, as Suha of 
Bengal, the English had speedily a most terrible 
experience of the violent and passionate character 
of this young Prince, whom they had irritated by 
their arrogance and the shelter they had given to 
one of his enemies. Driven to extremities by their 
bravados, he first treacherously seized a little fort 
which they had near the capital, and then came 
with a formidable army to besiege them in Calcutta, 
which w^as their chief Settlement on the Ganges. 

The vanity of the English having persuaded 
them the Moors would never dare to venture so 
far, they were so surprised and terrified that they 
lost their heads and could not profit by any of 
those advantages which Europeans have over such 
contemptible troops. Though numbering six 
hundred whites, well provided with all sorts of 
munitions and sheltered in a regular fort, they 
made scarcely any resistance at all after the 
Nawab ’s arrival. The Governor himself, Mr. 
Drake, with the Commandant of the troops, the 
greater part of the Council, officers and inhabitants, 
and all the women, took refuge on board the ships 



4 


THE FRENCH COUNCIL 


which were in the port. The few soldiers, who 
had remained in the fort, refusing to recognize 
any authority, disorder prevailed to such an extent 
that the white flag was displayed on the afternoon 
of the 20th, i. e. after three days’ siege. But the 
Moors, before the capitulation was arranged, 
crowded to the gates and, as no one fired on them, 
easily burst them in and entered, killing all who 
tried to resist. The plunder in the Settlement and 
fort was immense as the English had not taken the 
precaution to embark their wealth. 

That was, so to say, the beginning of their ills. 
The prisoners to the number of two hundred having 
been hurriedly shut up in a warehouse were almost 
all suffocated in one night. Those who survived, 
especially the chief men, after having suffered all 
kinds of misery and after having been dragged in 
chains to Murshidabad, the capital of Bengal, were 
sent back to us by the Nawab in the most de- 
plorable condition, which we tried to alleviate in 
every possible way. 

The lot of those saved in the ships has been 
hardly less wretched. Having with difficulty 
gained the mouth of the river, they have since 
endured all the bad weather of the rainy season, 
and at the same time been embarrassed by the 
numbers of women and children with whom their 
ships were crowded. This, joined to the bad 
provisions which were all they could obtain, 
quickly caused a kind of pestilential sickness which 
carried off many of them. 

The capture of Calcutta drew with it the ruin 
of all the small factories which they possessed 
scattered over Bengal, and now they do not retain 
a single establishment in this kingdom. Since this 



16 DECEMBER 1756 


5 


sad revolution only one vessel has arrived from 
Europe. It brought them two hundred and fifty 
men from Madras, but this reinforcement nob 
being large enough, they have planned no enter- 
prise so far. They expect every moment the arrival 
of a squadron of six ships of war and five of the 
Company’s, which left the coast on the 14th 
October and which brings them one thousand 
Europeans and three thousand sepoys. There is 
no doubt that with these forces they will be strong 
enough to retake Calcutta, which is now defended 
by only a small number of Moors. But besides the 
fact that its capture will not recoup them . . . the 
colony being entirely ruined and plundered, it is 
not certain that they will be able to maintain 
themselves in it against all the forces of the Nawab. 
What is absolutely certain is that this war must 
derange commerce, as it drives all the merchants 
away. 

Since the above was written the English squa- 
dron has arrived in the Ganges. The Director 
received a letter some days previously, by which 
M. Verrier, chief of the Surat factory, informed 
him that a small vessel, which was sent express by 
the English chief at Bassora and arrived at Bombay 
on the 5th October, brought letters from London 
intimating that war had been declared between 
France and England the 17th May preceding, that 
the Governor of Bombay had announced this by 
beat of drum in his island, and had immediately 
sent pattamars express to the Commander of the 
English squadron in the Roads at Balassore so that 
he might profit by this news and capture any of 
our vessels which were entering or going out of 
the Ganges. This news obliged us to postpone 



6 FRENCH COUNCIL, 16 DEC. 1756 

the departure of the Ruhy. But the frigate Danae 
which had just arrived having passed without any 
difficulty makes us think that the English, whom 
we cannot suppose ignorant of the aforesaid news, 
having other things to think of, do not intend to 
avail themselves of their superior forces against 
us, and the owners of the Ruhy having in conse- 
quence determined to dispatch this vessel promptly 
in order to ])rofit by these favourable circumstances, 
which make us suppose that the English think they 
must be careful in their behaviour towards us. 
Consequently we are going to work so as to 
dispatch th(‘ La Favorite as quickly as possible. 

2 . Colo7iel Clive to the Secret Cormnittee of 
the Directors, 26 July 1757 

I GAVE you an account of the taking of Chander- 
nagore ; the subject of this address is an event of 
much higlier importance, no less than the entire 
overthrow of Nabob Suraj-u-Dowlah, and the 
placing of Meer Jaffier on the throne. I intimated, 
in my last, how dilatory Suraj-u-Dowlah appeared 
in fulfilling the articles of the treaty. This dis- 
position not only continued but increased, and 
we discovered that he was designing our ruin, by 
a conjunction with the French. To this end 
Monsieur Bussy was pressingly invited to come 
into this province, and Monsieur Law of Cossim- 
bazar (who before had been privately entertained 
in his service) was ordered to return from Patna. 

About this time some of his principal officers 
made overtures to us for dethroning him. At the 
head of these was Meer Jaffier, then Bukhshee to 
the army, a man as generally esteemed as the 



CLIVE TO SECRET COMMITTEE, 1757 7 

other was detested. As we had reason to believe 
this disaffection pretty general, we soon entered 
into engagements with Meer Jaffier to put the 
crown on his head. All necessary preparations 
being completed with the utmost secrecy, the 
army, consisting of about one thousand Europeans, 
and two thousand sepoys, with eight pieces of 
cannon, marched from Chandernagore on the 13th, 
and arrived on the 18th at Cutwa Fort, which was 
taken without opposition. The 22nd, in the even- 
ing, we crossed the river, and landing on the island, 
marched straight for Plassey Grove, where we 
arrived by one in the morning. At daybreak, we 
discovered the Nabob’s army moving towards us, 
consisting, as wo since found, of about fifteen 
thousand horse, and thirty-five thousand foot, 
with upwards of forty pieces of cannon. They 
approached apace, and by six began to attack 
with a number of heavy cannon, supported by the 
whole army, and continued to play bn us very 
briskly for several hours, during which our situation 
was of the utmost service to us, being lodged in 
a large grove, with good mud banks. To succeed 
in an attempt on their cannon was next to im- 
possible, as they were planted in a manner round 
us, and at considerable distances from each other. 
We therefore remained quiet in our post, in 
expectation of a successful attack upon their camp 
at night. About noon, the enemy drew off their 
artillery, and retired to their camp, being the same 
which Roy Dullub had left but a few days before, 
and which he had fortified with a good ditch and 
breastwork. We immediately sent a detachment, 
accompanied with two field-pieces, to take posses- 
sion of a tank with high banks, which was advanced 



8 


ROBERT CLIVE 


about three hundred yards above our grove, and 
from whence the enemy had considerably annoyed 
us with some cannon managed by Frenchmen. 
This motion brought them out a second time ; but 
on finding them make no great effort to dislodge 
us, we proceeded to take possession of one or two 
more eminences lying very near an angle of their 
camp, from whence, and an adjacent eminence in 
their possession, they kept a smart fire of musketry 
upon us. They made several attempts to bring 
out their cannon, but our advanced field-pieces 
played so warmly and so well upon them, that they 
were always drove back. Their horse exposing 
themselves a good deal on this occasion, many of 
them were killed, and among the rest four or five 
officers of the first distinction, by which the whole 
army being visibly dispirited and thrown into 
some confusion, we were encouraged to storm 
both the eminence and the angle of their camp, 
which were carried at the same instant, with little 
or no loss ; though the latter was defended 
(exclusive of blacks) by forty French and two 
pieces of cannon ; and the former by a large body 
of blacks, both foot and horse. On this, a general 
rout ensued, and we pursued the enemy six miles, 
passing upwards of forty pieces of cannon they 
had abandoned, with an infinite number of 
hackeries, and carriages filled with baggage of all 
kinds. Suraj-u-Dowlah escaped on a camel, and 
reaching Moorshedabad early next morning, dis- 
patched away what jewels and treasure he 
conveniently could, and he himself followed at 
midnight, with only two or three attendants. 

It is computed there are killed of the enemy 
about five hundred. Our loss amounted to only 



9 


TO THE SECRET COMMITTEE, 1757 

twenty-two killed, and fifty wounded, and those 
chiefly blacks. During the warmest part of the 
action we observed a large body of troops hovering 
on our right, which, proved to be our friends ; but 
as they never discovered themselves by any signal 
whatsoever, we frequently fired on them to make 
them keep their distance. When the battle was 
over, they sent a congratulatory message, and 
encamped in our neighbourhood that night. The 
next morning Meer Jaffier paid me a visit, and 
expressed much gratitude at the service done him, 
assuring me, in the most solemn manner, that he 
would faithfully perform his engagement to the 
English. He then proceeded to the city, which 
he reached some hours before Suraj-u-Dowlah 
left it. 

As, immediately on Suraj-u-Dowlah’s flight, 
Meer Jaffier found himself in peaceable possession 
of the palace and city, I encamped without, to 
prevent the inhabitants from being plundered or 
disturbed ; first at Maudipoor, and afterwards at 
the French factory at Sydabad. However, I sent 
forward Messrs. Watts and Walsh to inquire into 
the state of the treasury, and inform me what was 
transacted at the palace. By their representations 
I soon found it necessary for me to be present, 
oil many accounts ; accordingly, I entered the 
city on the 29th, with a guard of two hundred 
Europeans and three hundred sepoys, and took 
up my quarters in a spacious house and garden 
near the palace. The same evening I waited on 
Meer Jaffier, who refused seating himself on the 
musnud till placed on it by me ; which done, he 
received homage as Nabob from all his courtiers. 
The next morning he returned my visit ; when. 



10 


ROBERT CLIVE 


after a good deal of discourse on the situation of 
his afEairs, I recommended him to consult Jugget 
Seit on all occasions, who being a man of sense, 
and having by far the greatest property among 
all his subjects, would give him the best advice for 
settling the kingdom in peace and security. 

On this, he proposed that we should immediately 
set out together to visit him, which being complied 
with, solemn engagements were entered into by the 
three parties, for a strict union and mutual support 
of each other’s interests. Jugget Seit then under- 
took to use his whole interest at Delhi (which is 
(certainly very great), to get the Nabob acknow- 
ledged by the Mogul, and our late grants confirmed ; 
likewise to procure for us any firmans we might 
have occasion for. 

The substance of the treaty with the present 
Nabob is as follows : — 

Ist. Confirmation of the mint, and all other 
grants and privileges in the treaty with the late 
Nabob. 

2ndly. An alliance, offensive and defensive, 
against all enemies whatever. 

3rdly. The French factories and effects to be 
delivered up, and they never permitted to resettle 
in any of the three provinces. 

4:thly. 100 lacs of rupees to be paid to the Com- 
pany, in consideration of their losses at Calcutta 
and the expenses of the campaign. 

5thly. 50 lacs to be given to the English sufferers 
at the loss of Calcutta. 

Gthly. 20 lacs to Gentoos, Moors, &c., black 
sufferers at the loss of Calcutta. 

7thly. 7 lacs to the Armenian sufferers. 

These three last donations to be distributed at 



TO THE SECRET COMMITTEE, 1757 11 

the pleasure of the Admiral and gentlemen of 
Council, including me. 

8thly. The entire property of all lands within 
the Mahratta ditch, which runs round Calcutta, 
to be vested in the Company : also, six hundred 
yards, all round, without the said ditch. 

9thly. The Company to have the zemindary of 
the country to the south of Calcutta, lying between 
the lake and river, and reaching as far as Culpee, 
they paying the customary rents paid by the 
former zemindars to the government. 

lOthly. Whenever the assistance of the English 
troops shall be wanted, their extraordinary charges 
to be paid by the Nabob. 

llthly. No forts to be erected by the govern- 
ment on the river side, from Hooghley downwards. 

12thly. The foregoing articles to be performed 
without delay, as soon as Meer Jafficr becomes 
Subadar. 

On examining the treasury, there were found 
about 150 lacs of rupees, which being too little to 
answer our demands, much less leave a sufficiency 
for the Nabob’s necessary disbursements, it was 
referred to Jugget Seit, as a mutual friend, to settle 
what payment should be made to us ; who accord- 
ingly determined, that we should immediately 
receive one half of our demand, — two thirds in 
money and one third in gold and silver plate, 
jewels, and goods ; and that the other half should 
be discharged in three years, at three equal and 
annual payments. 

The part to be paid in ready moneyis received and 
safely arrived at Calcutta ; and the goods, jewels, 
&c., are now delivered over to us; the major 
part of which will be bought back by the Nabob 



12 


ROBERT CLIVE 


for ready money, and on the remaining there will 
be little or no loss. A large proportion was pro- 
posed to have been paid us in jewels ; but as they 
are not a very saleable article, we got the amount 
reduced one half, and the difference to be made up 
in money. 

It is impossible as yet to form a judgement how 
much the granted lands will produce you, as the 
Europeans are quite ignorant of the extent of the 
country between the river and lake ; but, in order 
to give you some idea of the value, I’ll venture to 
estimate it at ten lacs per annum. An officer on 
the part of the Nabob is already dispatched to 
Calcutta to begin the survey, in company with 
one of ours. 

Suraj-u-Dowlah was not discovered till some 
days after his flight ; however, he was at last 
taken in the neighbourhood of Rajahmahul, and 
brought to Moorshedabad on the 2nd inst., late at 
night. He was immediately cut ofi by order of 
the Nabob’s son, and (as it is said) without the 
father’s knowledge. Next morning the Nabob 
paid me a visit, and thought it necessary fo 
palliate the matter on motives of policy ; for that 
8uraj-u-I)owlah had wrote letters on the road to 
many of the zemindars of the army, and occasioned 
some commotions among them in his favour. 

Monsieur Law and his party came as far as 
Rajahmahul to Suraj-u-Dowlah’s assistance, and 
were within three hours’ march of him when he 
was taken. As soon as they heard of his misfor- 
tunes, they returned by forced marches ; and, by 
the last advices, had passed by Patna, on the other 
side of the river. A party of Europeans and sepoys 
were quickly dispatched after them ; but I am 



•TO THE SECRET COMMITTEE 13 

doubtful if we shall be able to overtake them 
before they get out of the Nabob’s dominions. 
Strong letters have been wrote from the Nabob 
to the Naib of Patna, to distress them all in his 
power, and to take them prisoners if possible. A 
compliance with which I am in anxious expecta- 
tion of. 

I ought to observe, that the French I spoke of 
in the action were some fugitives from Chander- 
nagore, who had assembled at Sydabad. It was 
by their advice, and indeed by their hands, that 
the English factory at Cossimbazar was burned 
and destroyed, after our gentlemen had quitted 
it on the renewal of the troiibles. 

The present Nabob has every appearance of 
being firmly and durably seated on the throne. 
The whole country has quietly submitted to him, 
and even the apprehension of an inroad from the 
side of Delhi is vanished ; so that this great 
revolution, so happily brought about, seems 
complete in every respect. I persuade myself 
the importance of your possessions now in Bengal 
will determine you to send out, not only a large 
and early supply of troops and good officers, but 
of capable young gentlemen for the civil branches 
of your business. 

3. Colonel Clive to the Right Hon. William Pitt, 
7 January 1759 

Sir, 

Suffer an admirer of yours at this distance to 
congratulate himself on the glory and advantage 
which are likely to accrue to the nation by your 
being at its head, and at the same to return his 



U ROBERT CLIVE 

most grateful thanks for the distinguished manner 
you have been pleased to speak of his successes in 
these parts, far indeed beyond his deservings. 

The close attention you bestow on the affairs 
of the British nation in general has induced me 
to trouble you with a few particulars relative to 
India, and to lay before you an exact account of 
the revenues of this country, the genuineness 
whereof you may depend upon, as it has been 
faithfully extracted from the Minister’s books. 

The great revolution that has been effected here 
by the success of the English arms, and the vast 
advantages gained to the Company by a treaty 
concluded in consequence thereof, have, I observe, 
in some measure, engaged the public attention ; 
but much more may yet in time be done, if the 
Company will exert themselves in the manner the 
importance of their present possessions and future 
prospects deserves. I have represented to them 
in the strongest terms the expediency of sending 
out and keeping up constantly such a force as will 
enable them to (‘unbrace the first opportunity of 
further aggrandizing themselves ; and I dare 
pronounce, from a thorough knowledge of this 
country government, and of the genius of the 
people, ac(|uired by two years’ application and 
experience, that such an opportunity will soon 
offer. The reigning Subah, whom the victory at 
Plassey invested with the sovereignty of these 
provinces, still, it is true, retains his attachment 
to us, and probably, while he has no other support, 
will continue to do so ; but Musselmans are so 
little influenced by gratitude, that should he ever 
think it his interest to break with us, the obligations 
he owes us would prove no restraint : and this is 



15 


TO WILLIAM PITT, 1759 

very evident from his having lately removed his 
Prime Minister, and cut off two or three principal 
officers, all attached to our interest, and who had 
a share in his elevation. Moreover, he is advanced 
in years ; and his son is so cruel, worthless a young 
fellow, and so apparently an enemy to the English, 
that it will be almost unsafe trusting him with the 
succession. So small a body as two thousand 
Europeans will secure us against any apprehen- 
sions from either the one or the other ; and, in 
case of their daring to be troublesome, enable the 
Company to take the sovereignty upon themselves. 

There will be the less difficulty in bringing about 
such an event, as the natives themselves have no 
attachment whatever to particular princes ; and 
as, under the present Government, they have no 
security for their lives or properties, they would 
rejoice in so happy an exchange as that of a mild 
for a despotic Government : and there is little 
room to doubt our easily obtaining the Moghurs 
sunnud (or grant) in confirmation thereof, provided 
we agreed to pay him the stipulated allotment out 
of the revenues, viz. fifty lacs annually. This has, 
of late years, been very ill-paid, owing to the 
distractions in the heart of the Moghul Empire, 
which have disabled that court from attending to 
their concerns in the distant provinces : and the 
Vizier has actually wrote to me, desiring I would 
engage the Nabob to make the payments agreeable 
to the former usage ; nay, further : application 
has been made to me from the Court of Delhi, to 
take charge of collecting this payment, the person 
entrusted with which is styled the King’s Dewan, 
and is the next person both in dignity and power 
to the Subah. But this high office I have been 



16 


ROBERT CLIVE 


obliged to decline for the present, as I am unwilling 
to occasion any jealousy on the part of the Subah ; 
especially as I see no likelihood of the Company’s 
providing us with a sufficient force to support 
properly so considerable an employ, and which 
would open a way for securing the Subahship to 
ourselves. That this would be agreeable to the 
Moghul can hardly be questioned, as it would be 
so much to his interest to have these countries 
under the dominion of a nation famed for their good 
faith, rather than in the hands of people who, a 
long experience has convinced him, never will pay 
him his proportion of the revenues, unless awed 
into it by the fear of the Imperial army marching 
to force them thereto. 

But so large a sovereignty may possibly be an 
object too extensive for a mercantile Company ; 
and it is to be feared they are not of themselves 
able, without the nation’s assistance, to maintain 
so wide a dominion. I have therefore ])resumed, 
Sir, to represent this matter to you, and submit 
it to your consideration, whether the execution of 
a design, that may hereafter be still carried to 
greater lengths, be worthy of the Government’s 
taking it into hand. 1 flatter myself I have made 
it pretty clear to you, that there will be little or no 
difficulty in obtaining the absolute possession of 
these rich kingdoms ; and that with the Moghul’s 
own consent, on condition of paying him less than 
a fifth of the revenues thereof. Now I leave you 
to judge, whether an income yearly of upwards 
of two millions sterling, with the possession of 
three provinces abounding in the most valuable 
productions of nature and of art, be an object 
deserving the public attention ; and whether it 



17 


TO WILLIAM PITT, 1759 

be worth the nation’s while to take the proper 
measures to secure such an acquisition, — an 
acquisition which, under the management of so 
able and disinterested a minister, would prove a 
source of immense wealth to the kingdom, and 
might in time be appropriated in part as a fund 
towards diminishing the heavy load of debt under 
which we at present labour. Add to these ad- 
vantages the influence we shall thereby acquire 
over the several European nations engaged in the 
commerce here, which these could no longer carry 
on but through our indulgence, and under such 
limitations as we should think fit to prescribe. It 
is well worthy consideration, that this project may 
be brought about without draining the mother 
country, as has been too much the case with our 
possessions in America. A small force from home 
will be sufl&cient, as we always make sure of any 
number we please of black troops, who, being both 
much better paid and treated by us than % the 
country powers, will very readily enter into our 
service. Mr. Walsh, who will have the honour 
of delivering you this, having been my Secretary 
during the late fortunate expedition, is a thorough 
master of the subject, and will be able to explain 
to you the whole design, and the facility with 
which it may be executed, much more to your 
satisfaction, and with greater perspicuity, than 
can possibly be done in a letter. I shall therefore 
only further remark, that I have communicated it 
to no other person but yourself ; nor should I have 
troubled you, Sir, but from a conviction that you 
will give a favourable reception to any proposal 
intended for the public good. 

The greatest part of the troops belonging to this 



18 ROBERT CLIVE TO WILLIAM PITT, 1759 

establishment are now employed in an expedition 
against the French in the Deckan ; and, by the 
accounts lately received from thence, I have great 
hopes we shall succeed in extirpating them from 
the province of Golconda, where they have reigned 
lords paramount so long, and from whence they 
have drawn their principal resources during the 
troubles upon the coast. 

Notwithstanding the extraordinary efiort made 
by the French in sending out M. Lally with a 
considerable force the last year, I am confident, 
before the end of this, they will be near their last 
gasp in the Carnatic, unless some very unforeseen 
event interpose in their favour. The superiority 
of our squadron, and the plenty of money and 
supplies of all kinds which our friends on the coast 
will be furnished with from this province, while the 
enemy are in total want of every thing, without 
any visible means of redress, are such advantages 
as, if properly attended to, cannot fail of wholly 
effecting their ruin in that as well as in every other 
part of India. 

May the zeal and the vigorous measures, pro- 
jected for the service of the nation, which have so 
eminently distinguished your ministry, be crowned 
with all the success they deserve, is the most 
fervent wish of him who is, with the greatest 
respect, 

Sir, 

Your most devoted humble servant, 
(Signed) Robt, Clive. 


Calcutta, 7th January 1759, 



19 


4 . The Directors to Lord Clive, 26 April 1765 

Treaties of commerce are understood to be 
for th'e mutual benefit of the contracting parties. 
Is it then possible to suppose that the court of 
Delhi, by conferring the privilege of trading free 
of customs, could mean an inland trade in the 
commodities of their own country, at that period 
unpractised and unthought of by the English, to 
the detriment of their revenues and the ruin of 
their own merchants ? We do not find such a com 
struction was ever heard of, until our own servants 
first invented it, and afterwards supported it by 
violence. Neither could it be claimed by the 
subsequent treaties with Meer Jaffier, or Cossim 
Ali, which -were never understood to give one 
additional privilege of trade beyond what the 
firman expressed. In short, the specious argu- 
ments used by those who pretended to set up a 
right to it convince us they did not want judgement, 
but virtue to withstand the temptation of suddenly 
amassing a great fortune, although acquired by 
means incompatible with the peace of the country, 
and their duty to the Company. 

Equally blameable were they who, acknowledg- 
ing they had no right to it, and sensible of the ill 
consequences resulting from assuming it, have, 
nevertheless, carried on this trade, and used the 
authority of the Company to obtain, by a treaty 
exacted by violence, a sanction for a trade to 
enrich themselves, without the least regard or 
advantage to the Company, whose forces they 
employed to protect them in it. 

Had this short question been put, which their 
duty ought first to have suggested, ‘ Is it for the 



20 THE DIRECTORS TO LORD CLIVE 

interest of our employers ? ’ they would not have 
he8itat<jd one moment about it ; but this criterion 
seems never once to have occurred. 

All the barriers being thus broken down between 
the English and the country government, and 
everything out of its proper channel, we are at a 
loss how to prescribe means to restore order from 
this confusion ; and being deprived of that con- 
fidence which we hoped we might have placed in 
our servants, who appear to have been the actors 
jn these strange scenes, we can only say, that we 
rely on the zeal and abilities of Lord Clive, and the 
gentlemen of the Select Committee, to remedy 
these evils. We hope they will restore our reputa- 
tion among the country powers, and convince them 
of our abhorrence of oppression and rapaciousness. 

5. Fimian from Slmh Alam granting the 
Diwani of Bengal, Behar, and Orissa to the 
East India Company, 12 August 1765 

At this happy time our royal Firmaund, indis- 
pensably requiring obedience, is issued ; that 
whereas, in consideration of the attachment and 
services of the high and mighty, the noblest of 
exalted nobles, the chief of illustrious warriors, 
our faithful servants and sincere well-wishers, 
worthy of our royal favours, the English Company, 
we have granted them theDewanny of the Provinces 
of Bengal, Behar, and Orissa, from the beginning 
of the Fussul Rubby of the Bengal year 1172, as 
a free gift and ultumgau, without the association 
of any other person, and with an exemption from 
the payment ^of the customs of the Dewanny, 
which used to be paid to the Court. It is requisite 



FIRMAN FROM SHAH ALAM, 12 AUG. 1765 21 

that the said Company engage to be security for 
the sum of twenty-six lakhs of rupees a year, for 
our royal revenue, which sum has been appointed 
from the Nabob Nudjum-ul-Dowla Behauder, 
and regularly remit the same to the royal Circar ; 
and in this case, as the said Company are obliged 
to keep up a large army for the protection of the 
Provinces of Bengal, &;c., we have granted to them 
whatsoever may remain out of the revenues of the 
said Provinces, after remitting the sum of twenty- 
six lakhs of rupees to the royal Circar, and providing 
for the expenses of the Nizamut. It is requisite 
that our royal descendents, the Viziers, the 
bestowers of dignity, the Omrahs, high in rank, 
the great officers, the Muttaseddees of the Dewanny , 
the managers of the business of the Sultanut, the 
Jaghirdars and Croories, as well the future as the 
present, using their constant endeavours for the 
establishment of this our royal command, leave 
the said office in possession of the said Company, 
from generation to generation, for ever and ever. 
Looking upon them to be assured from dismission 
or removal, they must, on no account whatsoever, 
give them any interruption, and they must regard 
them as excused and exempted from the payment of 
all the customs of the Dewanny and royal demands. 
Knowing our orders on the subject to be most 
strict and positive, let them not deviate therefrom. 

Written the 24th of Sophar, of the 6th year of the 
JalooSy the 12th of August 1765. 

Contents of the Zimmun 

Agreeably to the paper which has received our 
sign manual, our royal commands are issued, that 
in consideration of the attachment and services of 



22 FIRMAN FROM SHAH ALAM 

the high and mighty, the noblest of exalted nobles, 
the chief of illustrious warriors, our faithful 
servants and sincere well-wishers, worthy of our 
royal favours, the English Company, we have 
granted them the Dewanny of the Provinces of 
Bengal, Behar, and Orissa, from the beginning of 
the Pussul Rubby of the Bengal year 11*72, as free 
gift and ultumgau, without the association of any 
other person, and with an exemption from the 
customs of the Dewanny, which used to be paid to 
the Court, on condition of their being security for 
the sum of twenty-six lakhs of rupees a year for 
our royal revenue, which sum has been appointed 
from the Nabob Nudjum-ul-Dowla Behauder ; 
and after remitting the royal revenue and pro- 
viding for the expenses of the Nizamut, whatsoever 
may remain we have granted to the said Company : 

The Dewanny of the Province of Bengal. 

The Dewanny of the Province of Behar. 

The Dewanny of the Province of Orissa. 

Firmaund from the King Shah Aalum for 
THE Dewanny of the Province of Bengal, 1765 

At this happy time our royal Firmaund, indis- 
pensably requiring obedience, is issued ; that, in 
consideration of the attachment of the high and 
mighty, the noblest of exalted nobles, the chief of 
illustrious warriors, our faithful servants andsincere 
well-wishers, worthy of our royal favours, the English 
Company, we have granted them as a free gift and 
ultumgau, agreeably to the Zimmun, from the 
beginning of Rubby Tuccacooy-ul of the Bengal 
year 1172, the office of the Dewanny of the Khalsa 
Shereefa of the Province of Bengal (the Paradise of 
the Earth), with the conditional jaghire thereof, 



12 AUGUST 1765 


23 


without the association of any other person. It is 
requisite that our royal descendants, the Viziers, the 
bestowers of dignity, the Omrahs, high in rank, the 
great officers, the Muttaseddees of the Dewanny, the 
managers of the business of the Sultanut, the Jaghir- 
dars and Croories, as well the future as the present, 
using their constant endeavours for the establish- 
ment of this our royal command, leave the said 
office in possession of thesaidlCompany, from genera- 
tion to generation, for ever and ever. Looking 
upon them to be insured from dismissal or removal, 
they must, on no account whatsoever, give them any 
interruption, and they must regard them as excused 
and exempted from the payment of all the cus- 
toms of the Dewanny and demands of the Sultanut. 
Knowing our orders on this subject to be most 
strict and positive, let them not deviate therefrom. 

Written the 24th of Sophar, of the 6th year of the 
Jaloos, the 12th of August 1765. 

Contents of the Zimrnun 
Agreeably to the paper which has received our 
sign manual, we have granted the office of the 
Dewanny of the Khalsa Shereefa of the Province 
of Bengal (the Paradise of the Earth), with the 
conditional jaghire thereof, as a free gift and 
ultumgau, to the high and mighty, the noTblest 
of exalted nobles, the chief of illustrious warriors, 
our faithful servants and sincere well-wishers, 
worthy of our royal favours, the English Company, 
without the association of any other person from 
the beginning of the Rubby Tuccacooy-ul of the 
Bengal year 1172. 

Fort William, 30th September 1765. 

(A true copy.) 

(Signed) Alexander Campbell, S.S.C. 



24 FIRMAN FROM SHAH ALAM 

[Similar separate Firmaunds were granted for 
Behar and Orissa.] 

Firmaund from the King Shah Aalum, 

CONFIRMING THE GRANTS OF BuRDWAN AND THE 

Rest of the Company’s Possessions in Bengal 
TO them, 1765. 

At this happy time our royal Firmaund, indis- 
pensably requiring obedience, is issued ; that 
the Chucklas of Burdwan, Midnapore, and Chitta- 
gong, and also the Twenty-four Pergunnahs of 
Calcutta, &c. (the zemindarry of the high and 
mighty, the noblest of exalted nobles, the chief of 
illustrious warriors, our faithful servants and 
sincere well-wishers, worthy of our royal favours, 
the English Company), which were granted to the 
said Company in the time of Meer Mahomed 
Kossim, and Meer Mahomed Jaffier Khan, deceased; 
we, in consideration of the attachment of the said 
Company, have been graciously pleased to confirm 
to them, from the beginning of the Fussul Rubby 
of the Bengal year 1172, as a free gift and ultum- 
gau, without the association of any other person. 
It is requisite that our royal descendants, the 
Viziers, the bestowers of dignity, the Omrahs, 
high in rank, the great officers, the Muttascddecs 
of the Dewannv, the managers of the business of 
the Sultanut, the Jaghirdars and Croories, as well 
the future as the present, using their constant 
endeavours for the establishment of this our royal 
command, leave the said Districts and Pergunnahs 
in possession of the said Company, from generation 
to generation, for ever and ever. Looking upon 
them to be insured from dismissal or removal, 
they must on no account whatsoever give them 



12 AUGUST 1765 


25 


any interruption, and they must regard them as 
excused and exempted from the payment of all 
manner of customs and demands. Knowing our 
orders on this subject to be most strict and positive, 
let them not deviate herefrom. 

Written the 24th of Sophar, of the 6th year of the 
JalooSy the 12th of Auaust 1765. 

Contents of the Zimmun 

Agreeably to the paper which has received 
our sign manual, our royal commands are issued, 
that the Chucklas of Burdwan, Midnapore, and 
Chittagong, and also twenty-four Pergunnahs 
of Calcutta, &c. (the zemindarry of the English 
Company), which were granted to the said Com- 
pany in the time of Meer Mahomed Kossim, and 
Meer Mahomed Jaffier Khan,decea8ed, be confirmed 
to the said Company, as a free gift and ultumgau, 
without the association of any other person. — 

Chuckla of Burdwan. 

Chuckla of Midnapore. 

Chuckla of Chittagong. 

The twenty-four Pergunnahs of Calcutta, &c. 
(the zemindarry of the English Company). 

Fort Williafrij 30th September 1765. 

(A true copy.) 

(Signed) Alexander Campbell, S.S.C. 

Articles of Agreement between the Shah 
Aalum and the Company. 

The Nabob Nudjum-ul-Dowla agrees to pay 
His Majesty, out of the revenues of Bengal, Behar, 
and Orissa, the sum of twenty-six lakhs of rupees a 
year, without any deduction for batta on bills of ex- 
change, by regular monthly payments, amounting 



26 FIRMAN FROM SHAH ALAM 

to rupees 2,16,666-10-9 per month ; the first pay- 
ment to commence from the 1st of September 
of the present year : and the English Company, 
in consideration of His Majesty’s having been 
graciously pleased to grant them the Dewanny of 
Bengal, &c., do engage themselves to be security 
for the regular payment of the same. It shall be 
paid month by month from the factory at Patna 
to Rajah Shitabroy, or whomsoever His Majesty 
may think proper to nominate, that it may be 
forwarded by him to the Court. But in case the 
territories of the aforesaid Nabob should be 
invaded by any foreign enemy, a deduction is 
then to be made out of the stipulated revenues, 
proportionable to the damage that may be sus- 
tained. 

In consideration of Nudjuf Khan’s having joined 
the English forces, and acted in His Majesty’s ser- 
vice in the late war. His Majesty will be graciously 
pleased to allow him the sum of two lakhs of 
rupees a year to be paid by equal monthly pay- 
ments ; the first ])aymont to commence from the 
1st of September of the present year ; and, in default 
thereof, the English Company, who are guarantees 
for the same, will make it good out of the revenues 
allotted to His Majesty from the territories of 
Bengal. If the territories of Bengal should at any 
time be invaded, and on that account a deduction 
be made out of the royal revenue, in such case a 
proportionable deduction shall also be made out 
of Nudjuf Khan’s allowance. 

Dated the 19th of August 1765, 

Fort William, 30th September 1765. 

(A true copy.) 

(Signed) Alexander Campbell, S.S.C. 



12 AUGUST 1765 


27 


Agreement between the Nabob Nudjum-ul- 
Dowlah and the Company. 

The King having been graciously pleased to 
grant to the English Company the Dcwanny of 
Bengal, Behar, and Orissa, with the revenues 
thereof, as a free gift for ever, on certain conditions, 
whereof one is that there shall be a sufficient allow- 
ance out of the said revenues for supporting the 
expenses of the Nizamut : be it known to all whom 
it may concern, that 1 do agree to accept of the 
annual sum of Sicca rupees 53,86,131-9, as an 
adequate allowance for the support of the Nizamut, 
which is to be regularly paid as follows, viz. : the 
sum of rupees 17,78,854-1, for all my household 
expenses, servants, &c., and the remaining sum of 
rupees 36,07,277-8, for the maintenance of such 
horse, sepoys, peons, bercundauzes, &c., as may 
be thought necessary for my suwarry and. the 
support of my dignity only, should such an expense 
hereafter be found necessary to be kept up, but on 
no account ever to exceed that amount : and 
having a perfect reliance on ul-Miaeen Dowla, I 
desire he may have the disbursing of the above 
sum of rupees 36,07,277-8, for the purposes before- 
mentioned. This Agreement (by the blessing of 
God) 1 hope will be inviolably observed, as long 
as the English Company’s factories continue in 
Bengal. 

Fort William, 30th September 1765, 

(A true copy.) 

(Signed) Alexander Campbell, S.S.C 



28 TREATY BETWEEN THE NAWABS 


6. Treaty between the Nawab Shujau-d daula, 
ofOudh, the Naimb Najmu-d daula, of Bengal, 
and the East India Company, 16 August, 1765 

Article 1 

A PERPETUAL and universal peace, sincere friend- 
ship, and firm union shall be established between 
His Highness Shujah-ul-Dowla and his heirs, on 
the one part, and His Excellency Nudjum-ul-Dowla 
and the English East India Company on the other ; 
so that the said contracting powers shall give the 
greatest attention to maintain between themselves, 
their dominions and their subjects this reciprocal 
friendship, without permitting, on either side, any 
kind of hostilities to be committed, from henceforth, 
for any cause, or under any pretence whatsoever, 
and everything shall be carefully avoided which 
might hereafter prejudice the union now happily 
established. 

Article 2 

In case the dominions of His Highness Shujah- 
ul-Dowla shall at any time hereafter be attacked, 
His Excellency Nudjum-ul-Dowla and the English 
Company shall assist him with a part or the whole 
of their forces, according to the exigency of his 
affairs, and so far as may be consistent with their 
own security, and if the dominions of his Excellency 
Nudjum-ul-Dowla or the English Company, shall 
be attacked. His Highness shall, in like manner, 
assist them with a part or the whole of his forces. 
In the case of the English Company’s forces being 
employed in His Highness’s service, the extra- 
ordinary expense of the same is to be defrayed by 
bim. 



AND THE COMPANY, 1765 


29 


Article 3 

His Highness solemnly engages never to enter- 
tain or receive Cossim Ally Khan, the late Soubah- 
dar of Bengal, &c., Sombre, the assassin of the 
English, nor any of the European deserters, 
within his dominions, nor to give the least counten- 
ance, support, or protection to them. He likewise 
solemnly engages to deliver up to the English 
whatever European may in future desert from 
them into his country. 

Article 4 

The King Shah Aalum shall remain in full 
possession of Cora, and such part of the Province 
of Illiabad as he now possesses, which are ceded 
to His Majesty, as a royal demesne, for the 
support of his dignity and expenses. 

Article 5 

His Highness Shujah-ul-Dowla engages, in a 
most solemn manner, to continue Bui want Sing in 
the zemindarries of Benares, Ghazepore, and all 
those districts he possessed at the time he came 
over to the late Nabob Jaffier Ally Khan and the 
English, on condition of his paying the same 
revenue as heretofore. 

Article 6 

In consideration of the great expense incurred 
by the English Company in carrying on the late 
war. His Highness agrees to pay them (50) fifty 
lakhs of rupees in the following manner ; viz. (12) 
twelve lakhs in money, and a deposit of jewels to 
the amount of (8) eight lakhs, upon the signing of 
this Treaty, (5) five lakhs one month after, and the 



30 NAWABS AND THE COMPANY, 1765 

remaining (25) twenty-five lakhs by monthly 
payments, so as that the whole may be discharged 
in (13) thirteen months from the date hereof. 

Article 8 

His Highness shall allow the English Company 
to carry on a trade, duty free, throughout the 
whole of his dominions. 

AimcLE 1) 

All the relations and subjects of His Highness, 
who in any manner assisted the English during the 
course of the late war, shall bo forgiven, and no 
ways molested for the same. 

Article 10 

As soon as this Treaty is executed, the English 
forces shall be withdrawn from the dominions of 
His Highness, except such as may be necessary for 
the garrison of Chumar, or for the defence and 
protection of the King in the city of Illiabad, if 
His Majesty should require a force for that 
purpose. 

7. East Indig> Company Act, 1767 
(7 Geo, in, c. 57) 

An Act for establishing an agreement for the 
payment of the annual sum of four hundred 
thousand pounds, for a limited time, by the 
East India Company, in respect of the territorial 
acquisitions and revenues lately obtained in the 
East Indies. 

Whereas the United Company of Merchants of 
England trading to the East Indies have proposed 
that a temporary agreement should be made in 



31 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1767 

relation to the territorial acquisitions and revenues 
lately obtained there ; and have thereupon 
offered to pay, for the benefit of the public during 
the term of such agreement, the yearly sum of 
four hundred thousand pounds, by half-yearly 
payments. And whereas it may be for the benefit 
of the public, and the said Company, that a 
temporary agreement for the space of two years, 
should be made in regard to the said territorial 
acquisitions and revenues. Now we, your 
Majesty’s most dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Commons of Great Britain, in Parliament assem- 
bled, do most humbly beseech your Majesty, that 
it may be enacted ; and be it enacted by the King’s 
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, 
and Commons, in this present Parliament assem- 
bled, and by the authority of the same, that the 
said United Company of Merchants of England 
trading to the East Indies, and their successors, 
shall advance and pay into the receipt of His 
Majesty’s Exchequer, for His Majesty’s use, the 
sum of four hundred thousand pounds per annum, 
for and during the term of two years, to be computed 
from the first day of February, one thousand seven 
hundred and sixty-seven, by half-yearly pay- 
ments of two hundred thousand pounds each ; 
which half-yearly jjayments of two hundred thou- 
sand pounds shall become due on the first day of 
August, and the first day of February in each year ; 
and shall be made on or before the twenty-fifth 
day of March next ensuing such first day of August, 
and on the twenty-ninth day of September next 
ensuing such first day of February respectively, in 
each year ; the first of which half-yearly payments 



32 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1767 


shall become due on the first day of August, one 
thousand seven hundred and sixty-seven ; and be 
made on or before the twenty-fifth day of March, 
one thousand seven hundred and sixty-eight } 
and in case the said United Company of Merchants 
of England trading to the East Indies, or their 
successors, shall make failure in any of the said 
payments hereby appointed to be made into the 
receipt of His Majesty’s Exchequer, on or before 
the respective days or times herein before limited ; 
that then, from time to time, as often as such case 
shall so happen, the money, whereof such failure 
in payment shall be made, shall and may be 
recovered to His Majesty’s use, by action of debt, 
or upon the case, bill, suit or information, in any of 
his Majesty’s Courts of Record at Westminster, 
wherein no essoin, protection, privilege, or wager 
of law, shall be allowed, or any more than one 
imparlance ; in which action, bill, suit or informa- 
tion, it shall be lawful to declare, that the said 
United Company of Merchants of England trading 
to the East Indies, or their successors, are indebted 
to His Majesty the moneys of which they shall have 
made default in payment, according to the form of 
this statute, and have not paid the same, which 
shall be sufficient ; and in or upon such action, bill, 
suit or information, there shall be further re- 
covered, to His Majesty’s use, against the said 
United Company of Merchants of England trading 
to the East Indies, or their successors, damages, 
after the rate of fifteen pounds per centum per 
annum, for the respective moneys so unpaid, con- 
trary to this act, together with full costs of suit ; 
and the said United Company, and their successors, 
and all their stock, funds, and all other their estates 



33 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1767 

and property whatsoever and wheresoever, shall 
be, and are hereby made, subject and liable to the 
payment of such moneys, damages, and costs. 

II. And it is hereby further enacted and declared 
by the authority aforesaid, that all the said terri- 
torial acquisitions and revenues, lately obtained 
in the East Indies, shall remain in possession of the 
said United Company, and their successors, during 
the said term of two years, to be computed from 
the said first day of February, one thousand seven 
hundred and sixty-seven. 

III. Provided nevertheless, and be it further 
enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if the said 
United Company, or their successors, shall be 
dispossessed by any foreign Power of any part of 
the said territorial acquisitions or revenues, at any 
time or times before the expiration of the said 
t(^rin of two years, to be computed from the first 
day of. February, one thousand seven hundred 
and sixty-seven ; then, and in every such case, and 
as often as such case shall so happen, the payment 
f)f the said annual sum of four hundred thou- 
sand pounds, for or in respect of the time or 
times during which the said Company, or their 
successors, shall remain so dispossessed, shall be 
reduced in such proportion to the whole of the 
said annual sum as the net income and profits of the 
territorial acquisitions and revenues, of which the 
said Company, or their successors, shall have been 
so dispossessed, shall have borne to the whole of 
the net income and profits of all the said territorial 

; Perquisitions and revenues, upon the average of the 
j year preceding their being so dispossessed ; and 
i^f it shall happen that any payment or payments 
shall have been made, for or in respect of any time 

231 ri 



34 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1767 

or times during which the said Company, or their 
successors, shall have been so dispossessed as 
aforesaid, such proportional part of the moneys as 
shall have been so paid for or in respect thereof, or 
so much of such proportional part of the said 
moneys as shall not have been appropriated in 
manner herein after mentioned, shall be repaid 
and refunded at the said Keceipt of the Exchequer 
to the said Company, or their successors ; and, in 
lieu of the money which shall have been so appro- 
priated, a sum equal thereto shall be paid to the 
said Company, or their successors, out of the fund 
commonly called the Sinking Fund ; which pay- 
ment is hereby charged upon the said Fund, and 
shall be made thereout, after paying, or reserving 
sufficient to pay, all previous charges thereupon ; 
anything herein before contained to the contrary 
notwithstanding. 

IV. And be it further enacted by the authority 
aforesaid, that the moneys which shall be paid 
into the Eeceipt of His Majesty’s Exchequer, 
in pursuance of this Act, shall be there re- 
served to be disposed of and appropriated by 
Parliament. 

8 . Warren Hastings to the Court of Directors^ 
. 11 November 1773 

Honourable Sirs, 

I have been duly honoured with your letter of 
the 16th April by the Harcourt and duplicate of 
the same by the Egmont. 

I am at a loss for words to convey the sense 
which I entertain of the honourable terms in 
which you have been pleased to express your 



HASTINGS TO THE DIRECTORS, 1773 35 

approbation of my services. While my gratitude 
is excited by these instances of your kindness, I 
feel my zeal encouraged by the assurances which 
you have been pleased to afford me of your 
continued protection. My best expression of 
thanks for both must be made by my future 
conduct, which (if I know my own heart) will 
never be drawn by any bias, however powerful, 
from the pursuit of your interests, nor do I wish or 
aspire to any reward superior to your applause. 

While I indulge the pleasure which I receive 
from the past success of my endeavours, I own 
I cannot refrain from looking back with a mixture 
of anxiety on the omissions by which I am sensible 
1 may since have hazarded the diminution of 
your esteem/ All my letters addressed to your 
honourable Court, and to the Select Committee, 
repeat the strongest promises of prosecuting the 
inquiries into the conduct of your servants, which 
you had been pleased to commit particularly to 
my charge. You will readily believe that I must 
have been sincere in those declarations, since it 
would have argued great indiscretion to have 
made them, had I foreseen my inability to perform 
them. I find myself now under the disagreeable 
necessity of avowing that inability ; at the same 
time that I will boldly take upon me to affirm that 
on whomsoever you might have delegated that 
charge, and by whatever powers it might have been 
accompanied, it would have been sufficient to 
occupy the entire attention of those who were 
entrusted with it, and even with all the aids of 
leisure and authority would have proved ineffectual. 
I dare appeal to the public records, to the testi- 
mony of those who have opportunities of knowing 



36 


WARREN HASTINGS 


me, and even to the detail which the public voice 
can report of the past acts of this government, that 
my time has been neither idly nor uselessly em- 
ployed. Yet such are the cares and embarrassments 
of this various state, that although much may be 
done, much more, even in matters of moment, 
must necessarily remain neglected. To select 
from the miscellaneous heap which each day’s 
exigencies present to our choice those points on 
which the general welfare of your affairs most 
essentially depends, to provide expedients for 
future advantages, and guard against probable 
evils, are all that your administration can faith- 
fully promise to perform for your service with 
their united labours most diligently exerted. 
They cannot look back, without sacrificing the 
objects of their immediate duty, which are those 
of your interests, to endless researches which can 
produce no real good, and may expose your 
affairs to all the ruinous consequences of personal 
malevolence both here and at home. 

May 1 be permitted, in all deference and sub- 
mission to your commands, to offer it as my opinion, 
that whatever may have been the conduct of 
individuals or even of the collective members of 
your former administrations, the blame is not so 
much imputable to them as to the want of a 
principle of government adequate to its substance, 
and a coercive power to enforce it. The extent of 
Bengal, and its possible resources, are equal to 
those of most states in Europe. Its difficulties 
are greater than those of any, because it wants 
both an established form and powers of govern- 
ment, deriving its actual support from the un- 
remitted labour and personal exertion of indivi- 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1773 37 

duals in power instead of the vital influence which 
flows through the channels of a regular constitu- 
tion, and imperceptibly 'animates every part of it. 
Our constitution is nowhere to be traced but in 
ancient charters which were framed for the 
jurisdiction of your trading settlements, the sales 
of your exports, and the provision of your annual 
investment. I need not observe how incompetent 
these must prove for the government of a great 
kingdom, and for the preservation of its riches 
from private violence and embezzlement. 

Among your servants, who for a course of years 
have been left at large in possession of so tempting 
a deposit, it is not to be wondered at that many 
have applied it to the advancement of their own 
fortunes, or that ^those who were possessed of 
abilities to introduce a system of better order 
should have been drawn along by the general 
current, since few men are inspired with so large 
a share of public virtue as to sacrifice their interests, 
peace, and social feelings to it, and to begin the 
work of reformation on themselves, 

1 should not have presumed to expatiate on a 
subject of this nature, although my own justifica- 
tion has made it in some measure necessary, but 
that your late advices have given hopes that we 
shall speedily be furnished with your instructions 
for establishing a system of law and polity which 
we hitherto want. Whenever this work shall be 
accomplished on a foundation of consistency and 
permanency, I will venture to foretell, from the 
knowledge which I have of the general habits and 
manners of your servants, that you will hear of as 
few instances of licentiousness amongst them as 
among the members of any community in the 



38 


WARREN HASTINGS 


British Empire. As this, whenever attempted, 
must necessarily be a work of time, I entreat your 
permission to submit to your consideration such 
defects in your present system as my experience 
has suggested to me, and I hope my intention will 
be judged with candour, although my own ambi- 
tion may be gratified by the regulations which I 
wish to recommend. 

I shall ofier but two points to your notice. One 
is the rapid succession of your governors ; the 
other, the undefined powers of the respective 
members of your administration. Both are pro- 
ductive of the same ill effects, a want of vigour 
and consistency in public measures, and a general 
diffidence and the consequent spirit of intrigue in 
those whose interests or services are by any mode 
of relation connected with our government. 

These well-known infirmities in our constitution 
were frequently alluded to by the Vizier in the 
late conferences which I had with him at Benares. 
He lamented the perpetual hazard to which he 
was exposed of losing the English friendship by 
the continual changes of their chiefs, who were 
no sooner known to him, and a confidence estab- 
lished with them, than they were recalled, and 
others substituted in their stead ; whose tempers 
he was to study, and whose affections he was to 
conciliate anew% and then to lose them as he had 
lost their predecessors, and have the same fruitless 
labour to repeat for ever. He once asked me in 
plain terms what assurances I could give him that 
new conditions would not be required of him 
or that those for which I should have pledged 
the faith of the Company should not be eluded 
by a new act of government, if six members of 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1773 39 

the Council should at any time propose an infrac- 
tion of the treaty, and four only joined me in 
opposing it. 

The powers of the Governor, although supposed 
to be great, are in reality little more than those of 
any individual in his Council. Their compliance, 
his own abilities, or a superior share of attention, 
and the opinion that he possesses extraordinary 
powers, may give him the efEect of them, and an 
ascendant over his associates in the administration ; 
but a moment’s contention is sufficient to discover 
the nakedness of his authority, and to level him 
with the rest. Happily I find myself sufficiently 
secured against such effects. The notice with 
which you have distinguished my services, the 
injunctions which you have laid on the other 
members of the Board to afford me their support, 
and the degree of responsibility which you have 
been pleased to attribute to my particular conduct, 
have contributed to strengthen my hands against 
any improper opposition. At the same time I 
must do the gentlemen of the Board the justice to 
declare that I have found in them so cordial a 
disposition to co-operate with me in every measure 
for the public good, that I feel no want of extra- 
ordinary powers for myself, nor, under such 
favourable circumstances, is it my wish to possess 
them. I mention this want only as a defect in the 
service, which is rendered still more important by 
the false opinion that the principal authority 
rests constitutionally in the hands of the President, 
when in effect it is merely accidental. 

To draw the line between him and the other 
members of his administration, and to define the 
powers which may be ‘entrusted to his charge, 



40 WARREN HASTINGS 

would not be an easy task. In me it may be 
deemed assuming ; yet I conceive it to be my duty, 
because I am convinced that the future prosperity, 
and even the being of the Company, and of the 
national interests in this great kingdom, depend 
upon it. The distant and slow interposition of the 
supreme power which is lodged in 5 mur hands 
cannot apply the remedies to the disorders which 
may arise in your state. A principle of vigour, 
activity, and decision must rest somewhere. In 
a body of men entrusted with it, its efficacy is lost 
by being too much divided. It is liable to still 
worse consequences, the less the number is of 
which the body consists, because the majority is 
easier formed. Fixed to a single point only it can 
command confidence and ensure consistency. I 
am compelled to affirm, because I know not by 
what arguments to prove, what appears to me a 
self-evident maxim. 

On the other hand there is a danger that such 
a power may be abused, unless powerful checks 
be provided to counteract the misapplication of it. 
These I leave to your wisdom to form, if the 
modification of it which I shall propose shall be 
found inadequate to the purpose. I will not take 
up more of your attention on this subject, but 
proceed to describe the points of distinction which 
appear to me necessary for ascertaining the 
respective provinces of the Council, the Select 
Committee, and the President. 

1. The Select Committee shall have the power 
of making peace and war, and of determining all 
measures respecting both, independent of the 
Council at large. But they shall enter into no 
treaty of alliance, whether offensive or defensive, 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1773 41 

for a longer duration than two years without a 
special authority from the honourable the Court 
of Directors. Every such treaty shall be com- 
municated to the Council at large as soon as it 
conveniently may be, that their opinion upon it 
may be transmitted with it to the Court of 
Directors. 

2. Ij shall nevertheless be allowable for the 
President to bring any matter before the Council 
at large, although included within the foregoing 
limitations, and the decision of the Council thereon 
shall be valid and binding on the Select Committee. 
But no other members of the Committee shall be 
allowed the same privilege. 

3. The President shall have the privilege of 
acting by his own separate authority on such urgent 
and extraordinary cases as shall in his judgement 
require it, notwithstanding any decision of the 
Council, or of the Committee passed thereon. On 
every such occasion the President shall record his 
resolution to act in the manner above specified, in 
virtue of the power thus vested in him, and shall 
expressly declare that he charges himself with the 
whole responsibility. 

4. All civil appointments within the provinces 
shall be made by the Board at large, but the 
President shall be empowered of his own authority 
to prevent any particular appointment, and to 
recall any person, not being a member of the Board, 
from his station, even without a reason assigned. 
All appointments beyond the provinces, and all 
military appointments which are not in the regular 
line of promotion, shall be made by the President 
alone. 

I shall forbear to comment on the above pro- 



42 


WARREN HASTINGS 


positions. If just and proper, their utility will be 
self- apparent. One clause only in the last article 
may require some explanation, namely, the power 
proposed for the governor of recalling any person 
from his station ‘ without assigning a reason for it 
In the charge of oppression, although supported 
by the cries of the people and the most authentic 
representations, it is yet impossible in mo^ cases 
to obtain legal proofs of it, and unless the discre- 
tionary power which I have recommended be some- 
where lodged, the assurahce of impunity from any 
formal inquiry will baffle every order of the Board, 
as on the other hand the fear of the consequences 
will restrain every man within the bounds of his 
duty if he knows himself liable to suher by the 
effect of a single control. 

I beg leave to return to the first subject herein 
offered to your consideration by declaring that as 
I have no wish in life equal to that of being useful 
in the sphere which has been allotted me, so it is 
my fixed resolution to devote my services to the 
Honourable Company so long as your pleasure and 
my health will allow me : and I oiler it as my 
humble opinion that on whomsoever you shall 
think fit to bestow the place which I now hold in 
your service, it will be advisable to fix him in it 
for a long period of time. I have already mentioned 
the principal evils which arise from the too frequent 
changes of your governors. I will beg leave to add 
another, in which I shall need your candour to 
obviate any misconstructions of it to my own 
prejudice. 

The first command of a state so extensive as 
that of Bengal is not without opportunities of 
private emoluments, and although the allowances 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1773 43 

which your bounty has liberally provided for your 
servants may be reasonably expected to fix the 
bounds of their desires, yet you will find it extremely 
difficult to restrain men from profiting by other 
means, who look upon their appointment as the 
measure of a day, and who, from the uncertainty 
of their condition, see no room for any acquisition 
but of wealth, since reputation and the consequence 
which follows the successful conduct of great 
affairs are only to be attained in a course of years. 
Under such circumstance, however rigid your 
orders may be, or however supported, I am afraid 
that in most instances they will produce no other 
fruits than either avowed disobedience or the 
worse extreme of falsehood and hypocrisy. These 
are not the principles which should rule the 
conduct of men whom you have constituted the 
guardians of your property, and checks on the 
morals and fidelity of others. The case of self- 
preservation will naturally suggest the necessity 
of seizing the opportunity of present power, when 
the duration of it is considered as limited to the 
usual term of three years, and of applying it to 
the provision of a future independency. Therefore 
every renewal of this term is liable to prove a 
reiterated oppression. 

It is perhaps owing to the causes which I have 
described, and a proof of their existence, that this 
appointment has been for some years past so 
eagerly solicited, and so easily resigned. There are 
yet other inconveniences attendant on this habit, 
and perhaps an investigation of them all would 
lead to endless discoveries. Every man whom 
your choice has honoured with so distinguished 
a trust seeks to merit approbation and acquire 



44 WARREN HASTINGS 

an 6clat by innovations, for which the wild scene 
before him affords ample and justifiable occasion. 
But innovations of real use require a length of time, 
and the unremitting application of their original 
principles to perfect them. Their immediate 
effects are often hurtful, and their intended 
benefits remote, or virtually diffused through such 
concealed channels that their source is not easy 
to be traced. Of this nature arc the late regula- 
tions in your revenue customs, and in the commerce 
of the country, which have been attended with an 
immediate loss in the collections, and in the price 
of your investment ; and it will require a long 
and intricate train of reasoning to prove that the 
future increase of population, of national wealth, 
of the revenue and trade, should such be the happy 
effects of these expedients, were really produced 
by them. But who that looks only for present 
applause or present credit would hazard both for 
remote advantages, of which another might 
arrogate the merit and assume the reward ? Or 
who will labour with equal perseverance for the 
accomplishment of measures projected by others, 
as of those of which he was himself the contriver ? 

Although I disclaim the consideration of my 
own interest in these speculations, and flatter 
myself I proceed upon more liberal grounds, yet 
I am proud to avow the feelings of an honest 
ambition that stimulates me to aspire at the 
possession of my present station for years to 
come. Those who know my natural turn of mind 
will not ascribe this to sordid views, a very few 
years possession of the government would un- 
doubtedly enable me to retire with a fortune 
amply fitted to the measure of my desires, were I 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1773 45 

to consult only my own ease ; but in my present 
situation I feel my mind expand to something 
greater. I have catched the desire of applause 
in public life. The important transactions in 
which I have been engaged, and my wish to see 
them take complete effect, the public approbation 
which you have been pleased to stamp on them, 
and the estimation which that cannot fail to give 
me in the general opinion of mankind, lead me to 
aim at deserving more ; and I wish to dedicate all 
my time, health, and labour to a service which has 
been so flattering in its commencement. 

Such are my views and such my sentiments. 
I expose them without reserve, because I am 
conscious you will find nothing unworthy in them, 
whatever opinion you may form of their expe- 
diency. 

I shall wait your determination with becoming 
expectation but without anxiety, nor shall I ever 
less esteem the favours I have already received, 
because others are withheld which it may be either 
not expedient or impracticable to grant. 

I have the honour to be, with the greatest respect, 
honourable Sirs, &c. 

9. East India Company Act, 1773 (13 Geo. Ill, 
c. 63) 

VIL And, for the better management of the 
said United Company’s affairs in India, be it 
further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that, 
for the government of the Presidency of Fort 
William in Bengal, there shall be appointed a 
Governor-General, and four counsellors ; and that 
the whole civil and military government of the said 



46 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

Presidency, and also the ordering, management 
and government of all the territorial acquisitions 
and revenues in the kingdoms of Bengal, Behar, 
and Orissa, shall, during such time as the territorial 
acquisitions and revenues shall remain in the 
possession of the said United Company, be, and 
are hereby vested in the said Governor-General 
and Council of the said Presidency of Fort William 
in Bengal, in like manner, to all intents and 
purposes whatsoever, as the same now are, or at 
any time heretofore might have been exercised by 
the President and Council, or Select Committee, 
in the said kingdoms. 

VIII. And be it enacted by the authority 
aforesaid, that in all cases whatsoever wherein 
any difference of opinion shall arise upon any 
question proposed in any consultation, the said 
Governor-General and Council shall be bound and 
concluded by the opinion and decision of the major 
part of those present : And if it shall happen that, 
by the death or removal, or by the absence, of any 
of the members of the said Council, such Governor- 
General and Council shall happen to be equally 
divided ; then, and in every such case, the said 
Governor-General, or, in his absence, the eldest 
counsellor present, shall have a casting voice, and 
his opinion shall be decisive and conclusive. 

IX. And be it further enacted by the authority 
aforesaid, that the said Governor- General and 
Council, or the major part of them, shall have, and 
they are hereby authorized to have, power of 
superintending and controlling the government 
and management of the Presidencies of Madras, 
Bombay, and Bencoolen respectively, so far and 
insomuch as that it shall not be lawful for any 



47 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

President and Council of Madras, Bombay, or 
Bencoolen, for the time being, to make any orders 
for commencing hostilities, or declaring or making 
war, against any Indian princes or powers, or for 
negotiating or concluding any treaty of peace, or 
other treaty, with any such Indian princes or 
powers, without the consent and approbation of 
the said Governor- General and Council first had 
and obtained, except in such cases of imminent 
necessity as would render it dangerous to postpone 
such hostilities or treaties until the orders from 
the Governor-General and Council might arrive ; 
and except in such cases where the said Presidents 
and Councils respectively shall have received special 
orders from the said United Company ; and any 
President and Council of Madras, Bombay, or 
Bencoolen, who shall oftend in any of the cases 
aforesaid, shall be liable to be suspended from his 
or their office by the order of the said Governor- 
General and Council ; and every President and 
Council of Madras, Bombay, and Bencoolen, for 
the time being, shall, and they are hereby respec- 
tively directed and required, to pay due obedience 
to such orders as they shall receive, touching the 
premises from the said Governor-General and 
Council for the time being, and constantly and 
diligently to transmit to the said Governor- 
General and Council advice and intelligence of all 
transactions and matters whatsoever that shall 
come to their knowledge, relating to the govern- 
ment, revenues, or interest, of the said United 
Company ; and the said Governor-General and 
Council for the time being shall, and they are 
hereby directed and required to pay due obedience 
to all such orders as they shall receive from the 



48 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773^ 

Court of Directors of the said United Company, 
and to correspond, from time to time, and con- 
stantly and diligently transmit to the said Court 
an exact particular of all advices or intelligence, 
and of all transactions and matters whatsoever, 
that shall come to their knowledge, relating to the 
government, commerce, revenues, or interest, of 
the said United Company ; and the Court of 
Directors of the said Company, or their successors, 
shall, and they are hereby directed and required, 
from time to time, before the expiration of fourteen 
days after the receiving any such letters or advices, 
to give in and deliver unto the High Treasurer, or 
Commissioners of His Majesty’s Treasury for the 
time being, a true and exact copy of such parts of 
the said letters or advices as shall any way relate 
to the management of the revenues of the said 
Company ; and in like manner to give in and 
deliver to one of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries 
of State for the time being a true and exact copy 
of all such parts of the said letters or advices as 
shall any way relate to the civil or military affairs 
and government of the said Company ; all which 
cdpies shall be fairly written, and shall be signed 
by two or more of the Directors of the said Company. 

X. And it is hereby further enacted, that Warren 
Hastings, Esquire, shall be the first Governor- 
General ; and that Lieutenant-General John 
Clavering, the Honourable George Monson, Richard 
Barwell, Esquire, and Philip Francis, Esquire, shall 
be the four first counsellors ; and they, and each 
of them, shall hold and continue in his and their 
respective offices for and during the term of five 
years from the time of their arrival at Fort William 
in Bengal, and taking upon them the government 



49 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

of the said Presidency, and shall not be removable, 
in the meantime, except by His Majesty, his heirs 
and successors, upon representation made by the 
Court of Directors of the said United Company for 
the time being ; and in case of the avoidance of 
the office of such Governor-General by death, 
resignation, or removal, his place shall, during the 
remainder of the term aforesaid, as often as the 
case shall happen, be supplied by the person of the 
Council who stands next in rank to such Governor- 
General ; and, in case of the death, removal, resig- 
nation, or promotion, of any of the said Council, 
the Directors of the said United Company are 
hereby empowered, for and during the remainder 
of the said ^rm of five years, to nominate and 
appoint, by and with the consent of His Majesty, 
his heirs and successors, to be signified under his 
or their sign* manual, a person to succeed to the 
office so become vacant in the said Council ; and 
until such appointment shall be made, all the 
powers and authorities vested in the Governor- 
General and Council shall rest and continue in, 
and be exercised and executed by, the Governor- 
General and Council remaining and surviving ; and 
from and after the expiration of the said term of 
five years, the power of nominating and removing 
the succeeding Governor-General and Council shall 
be vested in the Directors of the said United 
Company. 

XlII. And whereas His late Majesty King 
George the Second did, by his letters patent, 
bearing date at Westminster the eighth day of 
January, in the twenty-sixth year of his reign, 
grant unto the said United Company of Mer- 
chants of England trading to the East Indies his 



50 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

royal charter, thereby, amongst other things, 
constituting and establishing courts of civil, 
criminal, and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, at the 
said United Company’s respective settlements at 
Madras-patnam, Bombay on the island of Bombay, 
sand Fort William in Bengal ; which said charter 
does not sufficiently provide for the due adminis- 
tration of justice in such manner as the state and 
condition of the Company’s Presidency of Fort 
William in Bengal, so long as the said Company 
shall continue in the possession of the territorial 
acquisitions before mentioned, do and must 
require ; be it therefore enacted by the authority 
aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful for His 
Majesty, by charter, or letters patent under the 
great seal of Great Britain, to erect and establish 
a supreme court of judicature at Fort William 
aforesaid, to consist of a chief justice and three 
other judges, being barristers in England or 
Ireland, of not less than five years standing, to be 
named from time to time by His Majesty, his heirs 
and successors ; which said Supreme Court of 
Judicature shall have, and the same Court is hereby 
declared to have, full power and authority to 
exercise and perform all civil, criminal, admiralty, 
and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and to appoint such 
clerks, and other ministerial officers of the said 
Court, with such reasonable salaries, as shall be 
approved of by the said Governor- General and 
Council ; and to form and establish such rules of 
practice, and such rules for the process of the said 
Court, and to do all such other things as shall be 
found necessary for the administration of justice, 
and the due execution of all or any of the powers 
which, by the said charter, shall or may be granted 



51 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

and committed to the said Court ; and also shall 
be, at all times, a court of record, and shall be a 
court of oyer and terminer, and gaol delivery, in 
and for the said town of Calcutta, and factory of 
Fort William, in Bengal aforesaid, and the limits 
thereof, and the factories subordinate thereto. 

XIV. Provided nevertheless, and be it further 
enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said 
new charter which His Majesty is herein-before 
empowered to grant, and the jurisdiction, powers, 
and authorities, to be thereby established shall and 
may extend to all British subjects who shall reside 
in the kingdoms or provinces of Bengal, Behar, and 
Orissa, or any of them, under the protection of the 
said United Company ; and the same charter shall 
be competent and efiectual ; and the Supreme Court 
of Judicature therein, and thereby to be estab- 
lished, shall have full power and authority to hear 
and determine all complaints against any of His 
Majesty’s subjects for any crimes, misdemeanours, 
or oppressions, committed, or to be committed ; 
and also to entertain, hear, and determine, any 
suits or actions whatsoever, against any of His 
Majesty’s subjects in Bengal, Behar, and Orissa, 
and any suit, action or complaint against any 
person who shall, at the time when such debt, or 
cause of action, or complaint, shall have arisen, 
have been employed by, or shall then have been, 
directly or indirectly, in the service o£ the said 
United Company or of any of His Majesty’s subjects. 

XXIII. And be it further enacted by the 
authority aforesaid, that no Governor-General, or 
any of the Council of the said United Company’s 
Presidency of Fort William in Bengal, or any 
Chief Justice, or any of the Judges of the Supreme 



52 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

Court of Judicature at Fort William aforesaid, 
shall directly, or indirectly, by themselves, or by 
any other person or persons for his or their use, or 
on his or their behalf accept, receive, or take, of or 
from any person or persons, in any manner, or on 
any account whatsoever, any present, gift, dona- 
tion, gratuity, or reward pecuniary or otherwise, 
or any promise or engagement for any present, 
gift, donation, gratuity, or reward ; and that no 
Governor-General, or any of the said Council, or 
any Chief Justice or Judge of the said Court, shall 
carry on, be concerned in, or have any dealing or 
transactions, by way of traffick or commerce of 
any kind whatsoever, either for his or their use 
or benefit, profit or advantage, or for the benefit 
or advantage of any other person or persons 
whatsoever (the trade and commerce of the said 
United Company only excepted) ; any usage or 
custom to the contrary thereof in anywise not- 
withstanding. 

XXIV. And be it further enacted by the 
authority aforesaid, that from and after the first 
day of August, one thousand seven hundred and 
seventy-four, no person holding or exercising any 
civil or military office under the Crown, or the said 
United Company in the East Indies, shall accept, 
receive, or take, direct or indirectly, by himself, 
or any other person or persons on his behalf, or for 
his use or benefit, of and from any of the Indian 
princes or powers, or their ministers or agents (or 
any of the natives of Asia), any present, gift, 
donation, gratuity, or reward, pecuniary or other- 
wise, upon any account or on any pretence what- 
soever ; or any promise or engagement for any 
present, gift, donation, gratuity or reward ; and 



53 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

if any person, holding or exercising any such civil 
or military office, shall be guilty of any such 
offence, and shall be thereof legally convicted in 
such Supreme Court at Calcutta, or in the Mayor’s 
Court in any other of the said United Company’s 
settlements where such offence shall have been 
committed ; every such person so convicted, shall 
forfeit double the value of such present, gift, 
donation, gratuity, or reward, so taken and re- 
ceived ; one moiety of which forfeiture shall be to 
the said United Company, and the other moiety 
to him or them who shall inform or prosecute for 
the same ; and also shall and may be sent to 
England, by the order of the Governor and Council 
of the Presidency or settlement where the offender 
shall be convicted, unless sueh person so convicted 
shall give sufficient security to remove him or them- 
selves within twelve months after such conviction. 

XXXVI. And be it further enacted by the 
authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful 
for the Governor-General and Council of the said 
United Company’s settlement at Fort William in 
Bengal, from time to time, to make and issue such 
rules, ordinances, and regulations, for the good 
order and civil government of the said United 
Company’s settlement at Fort William aforesaid, 
and other factories and places subordinate, or to 
be subordinate thereto, as shall be deemed just and 
reasonable (such rules, ordinances, and regulations, 
not being repugnant to the laws of the realm), and 
to set, impose, inflict, and levy, reasonable fines 
and forfeitures for the breach or non-observance of 
such rules, ordinances, and regulations ; but 
nevertheless the same, or any of them, shall not 
be valid, or of any force or effect, until the same 



54 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

shall be duly registered and published in the said 
Supreme Court of Judicature, which shall be, by 
the said new charter, established, with the consent 
and approbation of the said Court, which registry 
shall not be made until the expiration of twenty 
days after the same shall be openly published, and 
a copy thereof affixed in some conspicuous part 
of the court-house or place where the said Supreme 
Court shall be held ; and from and immediately 
after such registry as aforesaid, the same shall be 
good and valid in law ; but, nevertheless, it shall 
be lawful for any person or persons in India to 
appeal therefrom to his Majesty, his heirs or 
successors, in Council, who are hereby empowered, 
if they think fit, to set aside and repeal any such 
rules, ordinances, and regulations respectively, 
so as such appeal, or notice thereof, be lodged in 
the said new Court of Judicature, within the space 
of sixty days after the time of . the registering and 
publishing the same ; and it shall be lawful for 
any person or persons in England to appeal there- 
from in like manner, within sixty days after 
the publishing the same in England ; and it is 
hereby directed and required that a copy of such 
rules, ordinances, and regulations, from time to 
time, as the same shall be so received, shall be 
affixed in some conspicuous and public place in 
the India House, there to remain and be resorted 
to as occasion shall require ; yet nevertheless, 
such appeal shall not obstruct, impede, or hinder 
the immediate execution of any rule, ordinance, or 
regulation, so made and registered as aforesaid, 
until the same shall appear to have been set aside 
or repealed, upon the hearing and determination 
of such appeal. 



55 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

XXXVII. Provided always, and be it enacted 
by the authority aforesaid, that the said Governor- 
General and Council shall, and they are hereby 
required, from time to time, to transmit copies 
of all such rules, ordinances, and regulations, as 
they shall make and issue, to one of His Majesty's 
principal Secretaries of State for the time being, 
and that it shall and may be lawful to and for His 
Majesty, his heirs and successors, from time to 
time, as they shall think necessary, to signify to 
the said United Company, under his or their sign 
manual, his or their disapprobation and disallow- 
ance of all such rules, ordinances, and regulations ; 
and that from and immediately after the time that 
such disapprobation shall be duly registered and 
published in the said Supreme Court of Judicature 
at Fort William in Bengal, all such rules, ordi- 
nances, and regulations, shall be null and void ; but 
in case His Majesty, his heirs and successors, shall 
not, within the space of two years from the making 
of such rules, ordinances, and regulations, signify 
his or their disapprobation or disallowance thereof, 
as aforesaid, that then, and in that case, all such 
rules, ordinances, and regulations, shall be valid 
and efiectual, and have full force. 

XXXVIII. And. be it further enacted by the 
authority aforesaid, that the Governor-General 
and Council for the time being of the said United 
Company’s settlement at Fort William aforesaid, 
and the Chief Justice and other Judges of the said 
Supreme Court of Judicature, shall and may, and 
they are hereby respectively declared to be, and 
to have full power and authority to act as jus- 
tices of the peace for the said settlement, and for 
the several settlements and factories subordinate 



56 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

thereto ; and to do and transact all matters and 
things which to the office of a justice or jus- 
tices of the peace do belong and appertain ; and 
for that purpose the said Governor-General and 
Council are hereby authorized and empowered to 
hold quarter- sessions within the said settlement 
of Fort William aforesaid, four times in every 
year, and the same shall be at all times a court of 
record. 

XXXIX. And be it further enacted by the 
authority aforesaid, that if any Governor-General, 
President, or Governor, or Council of any of the 
said Company’s principal or other settlements in 
India, or the Chief Justice, or any of the Judges of 
the said Supreme Court of Judicature, to be by the 
said new charter established, or of any other court 
in any of the said United Company’s settlements, 
or any other person or persons who now are, or 
heretofore have been employed by or in the service 
of the said United Company, in any civil or military 
station, office, or capacity, or who have or claim, 
or heretofore have had or claimed, any power or 
authority, or jurisdiction, by or from the said 
United Company, or any of His Majesty’s subjects 
residing in India, shall commit any offence against 
this act, or shall have been, oi; shall be guilty of, 
any crime, misdemeanour, or offence, committed 
against any of His Majesty’s subjects, or any of the 
inhabitants of India within their respective juris- 
dictions, all such crimes, offences and misdemean- 
ours, may be respectively inquired of, heard, tried, 
and determined in His Majesty’s Court of King’s 
Bench, and all such persons so offending, and not 
having been before tried for the same offence in 
India, shall, on conviction, in any such case as is 



57 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

not otherwise specially provided for by this Act, 
be liable to such fine or corporal punishment as the 
said Court shall think fit ; and moreover shall be 
liable, at the discretion of the said Court, to be 
adjudged to be incapable of serving the said 
United Company in any office, civil or military ; 
and all and every such crimes, offences, and mis- 
demeanours, as aforesaid, may be alleged to be 
committed, and may be laid, inquired of, and 
tried in the the county of Middlesex. 

XL. And whereas the provisions made by 
former laws for the hearing and determining in 
England offences committed in India have been 
found ineffectual, by reason of the difficulty of 
proving in this kingdom matters done there ; be 
it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that 
in all cases of indictments or informations, laid or 
exhibited in the said Court of King’s Bench, for 
misdemeanours or offences committed in India, it 
shall and may be lawful for His Majesty’s said 
Court, upon motion to be made on behalf of the 
prosecutor, or of the defendant or defendants, to 
award a writ or writs of mandamus, requiring the 
Chief Justice and Judges of the said Supreme 
Court of Judicature for the time being, or the 
Judges of the Mayor’s Court at Madras, Bombay, 
or Bencoolen, as the case may require, who are 
hereby respectively authorized and required ac- 
cordingly to hold a court, with all convenient 
speed, for the examination of witnesses, and 
receiving other proofs concerning the matters 
charged in such indictments or informations re- 
spectively ; and, in the meantime, to cause such 
public notice to be given of the holding of the 
said Court, and to issue such summons or other 



58 EA8T INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

process, as may be requisite for the attendance of 
witnesses, and of the agents or counsel, of all or any 
of the parties respectively, and to adjourn, from 
time to time as occasion may require ; and such 
examination as aforesaid shall be then and there 
openly and publicly taken viva voce in the said 
Court, upon the respective oaths of witnesses, and 
the oaths of skilful interpreters, administered 
according to the forms of their several religions ; 
and shall, by some sworn officer of such Court, be 
reduced into one or more writing or writings on 
parchment in case any duplicate or duplicates 
should be required by or on behalf of any of the 
parties interested, and shall be sent to His Majesty, 
in his Court of King’s Bench, closed up, and under 
the seals of two or more of the judges of the said 
Court, and one or more of the said judges shall 
deliver the same to the agent or agents of the party 
or parties requiring the same ; which said agent 
or agents (or in case of his or their death, the 
person into whose hands the same shall come) 
shall deliver the same to one of the clerks in court 
of His Majesty’s Court of King’s Bench, in the 
public office, and make oath that he received the 
same from the hands of one or more of the judges 
of such court in India (or if such agent be dead, 
in what manner the same came into his hands) : 
and that the same has not been opened, or altered, 
since he so received it (which said oath such clerk 
in court is hereby authorized and required to 
administer) : and such depositions, being duly 
taken and returned, according to the true intent 
and meaning of this Act, shall be allowed and read, 
and shall be deemed as good and competent 
evidence as if such witness had been present, and 



59 


EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1773 

sworn and examined viva voce at any trial for such 
crimes or misdemeanours, as aforesaid, in His 
Majesty’s said Court of King’s Bench, any law or 
usage to the contrary notwithstanding ; and all 
parties concerned shall be entitled to take copies 
of such depositions at their own costs and 
charges. 

XLI. And be it further enacted by the authority 
aforesaid, that in case the said Chief Justice, or 
Judges of the said Supreme Court of Judicature, 
or any of them, for the time being, shall commit 
any offence against this Act, or be guilty of any 
corrupt practice, or other crime, offence, or mis- 
demeanour, in the execution of their respective 
offices, it shall and may be lawful for His Majesty’s 
said Court of King’s Bench in England, upon an 
information or indictment laid or exhibited in the 
said Court for such crime, offence, or misdemeanour, 
upon motion to be made in the said Court, to 
award such writ or writs of mandamus, as afore- 
said, requiring the Governor-General, and Council 
of the said United Company’s settlement at Fort 
William aforesaid, who are hereby respectively 
authorized and required accordingly to assemble 
themselves in a reasonable time, and to cause all 
such proceedings to be had and made as are herein- 
before respectively directed and prescribed con- 
cerning the examination of witnesses ; and such 
examination, so taken, shall be returned and 
proceeded upon in the same manner, in all 
respects as if the several directions herein-before 
prescribed and enacted in that behalf were again 
repeated. 



WARREN HASTINGS 


dO 

10 . Warren Hastings to Lord Mansfield, 
21 March 1774 

My Lord, 

I feel a very sensible regret that I .have not 
endeavoured to improve the opportunities which 
1 possessed by an early introduction to your 
lordship’s acquaintance of acquiring a better 
right to the freedom which I now assume in this 
address. The great veneration which I have ever 
entertained for your lordship’s character, and the 
unimportant sphere in which, till lately, it has 
been my lot to act, were sufficient checks to restrain 
me from such an attempt, however my wishes 
might have impelled me to it. 

I know not whether you will admit the subject 
of this letter to merit your attention by its impor- 
tance. My only motive for introducing it to your 
lordship is, that I believe it to be of that impor- 
tance, as it regards the rights of a great nation in 
the most essential point of civil liberty, the preser- 
vation of its own laws, a subject, of which I know 
no person equally able to judge, or from whom I 
could hope for a more ready or effectual support 
of any proposition concerning it. 

Among the various plans which have been lately 
formed for the improvement of the British interests 
in the provinces of Bengal, the necessity of estab- 
lishing a new form of judicature, and giving laws 
to a people who were supposed to be governed 
by no other principle of justice than the arbitrary 
wills, or uninstructed judgements, of their tem- 
porary rulers, has been frequently suggested ; and 
this opinion I fear has obtained the greater 
strength from some publications of considerable 



61 


TO LORD MANSFIELD, 1774 

merit in which it is too positively asserted that 
written laws are totally unknown to the Hindoos, 
or original inhabitants of Hindostan. From what- 
ever cause this notion has proceeded, nothing can 
be more foreign from truth. They have been in 
possession of laws, which have continued un- 
changed, from the remotest antiquity. The pro- 
fessors of these laws, who are spread over the whole 
empire of Hindostan, speak the same language, 
which is unknown to the rest of the people, and 
receive public endowments and benefactions from 
every state and people, besides a degree of personal 
respect amounting almost to idolatry, in return 
for the benefits which are supposed to be derived 
from their studies. The consequence of these 
professors has suffered little diminution from the 
introduction of the Mahomedan government, 
which has generally left their privileges untouched, 
and suffered the people to remain in quiet possession 
of the institutes which time and religion had 
rendered familiar to their understandings and 
sacred to their affections. I presume, my lord, if 
this assertion can be proved, you will not deem it 
necessary that I should urge any argument in 
defence of their right to possess those benefits 
under a British and Christian administration which 
the bigotry of the Mahomedan government has 
never denied them. It would be a grievance to 
deprive the people of the protection of their own 
laws, but it would be a wanton tyranny to require 
their obedience to others of which they are wholly 
ignorant, and of which they have no possible 
means of acquiring a knowledge. 

I cannot offer a better proof of what I have 
before affirmed, than by presenting you with a 



WARREN HASTINGS 


specimen of. the laws themselves, which it will be 
necessary to preface with the following brief 
history of the manner in which it came into my 
hands. 

A short time after my appointment to the 
government of this Presidency, the Company were 
pleased to direct the administration here to take 
possession of the Dewanny, or territorial govern- 
ment of these provinces, in their name, without 
using any longer the intervention of an officer of 
the ancient Mogul government under the title of 
their Naib, or deputy, and gave them full powers 
to constitute such regulations for the collection 
and management ' of the revenue as they should 
judge most beneficial to the Company and the 
inhabitants. 

In the execution of this commission, it was 
discovered that the due administration of justice 
had so intimate a (‘onnexion with the revenue, that 
in the system which was adopted, this formed a 
very considerable part. Two courts were appointed 
for every district, one for the trial of crimes and 
ofiences, and the other to decide causes of property. 
The first consisted entirely of Mahomedans, and 
the latter of the principal officers of the revenue, 
assisted by the judges of the criminal courts, and 
by the most learned pundits (or professors of the 
Hindoo law), in cases which depended on the 
peculiar usages or institutions of either faith. 
These courts were made dependent on two supreme 
courts which were established in the city of Cal- 
cutta, one for ultimate reference in capital cases, 
the other for appeals. 

In this establishment no essential change was 
made in the ancient constitution of the province. 



63 


TO LORD MANSFIELD, 1774 

It was only brought back to its original principles, 
and the line prescribed for the jurisdiction of each 
court, which the looseness of the Mogul govern- 
ment for some years past had suffered to encroach 
upon each other. 

It would swell this letter to too great a bulk were 
I to enter into a more minute description, although 
I feel the necessity of making it more compre- 
hensive to convey an adequate idea of the subject. 

As it has never been the practice of this country 
for the pundits or expounders of the Hindoo law, 
to sit as judges of it, but only to give their opinions 
in such cases as might be proposed to them, and 
as these perpetually occurring occasioned very great 
delays in our proceedings, or were decided at once 
by the olSicers of the courts, without any reference, 
it was judged advisable, for the sake of giving 
confidence to the people and of enabling the courts 
to decide with certainty and dispatch, to form 
a compilation of the Hindoo laws with the best 
authority which could be obtained ; and for that 
purpose ten of the most learned pundits were 
invited to Calcutta from different parts of the 
province, who cheerfully undertook this work, 
have incessantly laboured in the prosecution of it, 
and have already, as they assure me, completed it, 
all but the revisal and correction of it. 

This code they have written in their own lan- 
guage, the Shanscrit. A translation of it is begun 
under the inspection of one of their body into the 
Persian language, and from that into English. 
The two first chapters I have now the honour to 
present to your lordship with this, as a proof that 
the inhabitants of this land are not in the savage 
state in which they have been unfairly represented, 



64 WARREN HASTINGS 

and as a specimen of the principles which constitute 
the rights of property among them. 

Although the second chapter has been translated 
with a dispatch that has not allowed time for 
rendering it quite so correct as I could wish to 
offer it to your lordship’s view, yet I can venture 
to vouch for the fidelity with which it is generally 
executed, such parts of it as I have compared with 
the Persian copy having been found literally exact. 

Your lordship will find a great mixture of the 
superstitions of their religion in this composition. 
Many passages in the first chapter are not to be 
reconciled to any rule known to us, but may be 
supposed to be perfectly consonant to their own 
maxims, as your lordship will perceive that they 
have been scrupulously exact in marking such 
cases as have received a different decision in the 
different originals from which this abstract is 
selected. 

Upon the merit of the work itself I will not 
presume to offer an opinion. I think it necessary 
to obviate any misconception which you may 
entertain from the similitude in the arrangement 
and style to our own productions, by saying that 
I am assured they are close and genuine transcripts 
from the original. 

With respect to the Mahometan law, which is the 
guide at least of one fourth of the natives of this 
province, your lordship need not be told that this 
is as comprehensive, and as well defined, as that 
of most states in Europe, having been formed at 
a time in which the Arabians were in possession 
of all the real learning which existed in the western 
parts of this continent. The book which bears the 
greatest authority among them in India is a digest 



65 


TO LORD MANSFIELD, 1774 

formed by the command of the Emperor Aurung- 
zebe, and consists of four large folio volumes which 
are equal to near twelve of ours. 

I have only to add that the design of this letter 
is to give your lordship a fair represeuatation of a 
fact of which the world has been misinformed, to 
the great injury of this country, and to prevent 
the ill effects which such an error may produce in 
a public attempt to deprive it of the most sacred 
and valuable of its rights. Even the most in- 
judicious or most fanciful customs which ignorance 
or superstition may have introduced among them, 
are perhaps preferable to any which could be 
substituted in their room. They are interwoven 
with their religion, and are therefore revered as 
of the highest authority. They are the conditions 
on which they hold their place in society, they 
think them equitable, and therefore it is no hard- 
ship to exact their obedience to them. I am 
persuaded they would consider the attempt to free 
them from the effects of such a power as a severe 
hardship. But I find myself exceeding the bounds 
which my deference for your lordship’s great 
wisdom had prescribed, and therefore quit the 
subject. 

I know the value of your lordship’s time, and 
reluctantly lay claim to so great a share of it as 
may be required for the perusal of this letter. I 
assure myself that you will approve my intention. 
My only apprehension is, that it may arrive too 
late to produce the effect which I hope to obtain 
from it. I would flatter myself that the work 
which it introduces may be of use in your lordship’s 
hands towards the legal accomplishment of a new 
system which shall found the authority of the 



66 


WARREN HASTINGS 


British Government in Bengal on its ancient laws, 
and serve to point out the way to rule this people 
with ease and moderation according to their own 
ideas, manners, and prejudices. But although 
I should be disappointed in this expectation, I still 
please myself with the persuasion that your lord- 
ship will receive it with satisfaction as an object 
of literary curiosity, whatever claim it may have 
to your attention from its intrinsic merit ; as it 
contains the genuine sentiments of a remote and 
ancient people at a period of time in which it was 
impossible for them to have had the smallest con- 
nexion or communication with the inhabitants of 
Europe, on a subject in which all mankind have a 
common interest, and is, I believe, the first produc- 
tion of the kind hitherto made known amongst us. — 
I have the honour to be, my lord, your lordship’s 
most obedient and most humble servant. 

11. Warren Hastings to Laurence Sullivan, 
21 March 1776 

Dear Sir, 

Whatever cause may have heretofore intervened 
to prevent the decision from being passed on me 
and my opponents, so many alarming circum- 
stances have lately occurred to show the absolute 
necessity of putting a speedy end to the disorders 
of this government, that I think it impossible for 
them to suffer it to remain longer in a state of 
distraction. The remedy may be administered 
when the evil is past cure. 

The provinces of Bengal enjoy peace, but no 
measures are taken for ensuring it; none for the 
prevention of its internal disorders ; none of any 



67 


TO LAURENCE SULLIVAN, 1776 

kind whatsoever, but such as are calculated to 
intimidate those who have ever looked to me for 
protection, or to repeal or render abortive those 
of my administration. Bitter complaints have 
been reiterated in all the letters of the majority, 
that the rents were overrated in the last settle- 
ment, yet they reproach me with not having 
realized it, and refuse to allow of the smallest 
deduction or remission in the revenues. Com- 
plaints are heard only against myself, or others, 
through whom they may be converted by implica- 
tion to charges against me ; and every decision 
even on matters in which it is commonly esteemed 
the most dishonourable to admit of a personal 
bias, has been dictated solely by the spirit of 
party. The Dewanny Courts of Justice faintly 
exist, but without any control ; the Sudder 
Dewanny, or Court of Appeals, which served as 
a check and a guard on the rest, having been long 
since formally abolished. The Foujdarry, or 
Criminal Courts, which formerly depended on 
myself, have scarce dared to act since the arrival 
of the new members of the Council ; and the whole 
Province is at this time, even to the boundaries of 
Calcutta, a prey to dacoits. This evil will, I hope, 
receive some alleviation from the care of Mahom- 
med Reza Cawn, to whom the charge of maintain- 
ing the peace of the country, and the superinten- 
dence of the Court of Criminal Justice, has been 
committed. But his authority is feeble ; and 
though he has been in possession of it these five 
months, its effects have not yet appeared. He 
looks, as others do, to a period of tranquillity. 
With his appointment, which is expressly against 
the orders of the Company, the Nabob was declared 



68 


WAEREN HASTINGS 


sovereign of the provinces, and possessed of all the 
rights of the Nizamut, that is, the exclusive power 
of administering justice in criminal cases, of ap- 
pointing guards for the protection of the country, 
and of punishing all violators of the peace ; that 
is to say, in other words he is the present instru- 
ment of the majority, in the hands of Mahommed 
Reza Cawn, to execute any violence which they 
may dictate unseen ; and armed by their public 
and repeated declarations with rights that will 
enable him to assume an uncontrolled rule for 
his own behalf, as soon as he shall have spirit to 
assert them. 

It is a little extraordinary that every measure 
which was taken in the course of my government, 
though generally approved, has been either 
repealed, or means taken to render it of no effect, 
without an attempt to introduce any other system 
in its stead. Nothing, say they, can now save the 
country from ruin, but to replace Mahommed 
Reza Cawn in the authority which I took out of his 
hands by the orders of the Court of Directors, and 
to restore the charge of the collections to super- 
visors. These measures are even recommended in 
a plan which Mr. Francis sent by the last ship to 
the Court of Directors for the new settlement, and 
why, 1 cannot conceive, unless it be for the sake of 
loading me with reproach for having removed 
both. The maxims which I laid down for my 
conduct, and by which it was invariably guided, 
were these : — First, to implant the authority of 
the Company, and the sovereignty of Great 
Britain, in the constitution of this country. 
Secondly, to abolish all secret influence, and make 
the government itself responsible for all measures. 



69 


TO LAURENCE SULLIVAN, 1776 

by making them all pass by its avowed authority. 
Thirdly, to remove all impediments which pre- 
vented the complaints of the people from reach- 
ing the ears of the supreme administration, or 
established an independent despotism in its agents. 
Fourthly, to relieve the reiats from oppressive taxes. 
Fifthly, to introduce a regular system of justice 
and protection into the country. Sixthly, to relieve 
the distresses of the Company at home — you know 
how great they were — ^and pay off their heavy 
debts here, by a uniform and regular mode of 
collecting their rents, by savings in expenses, and 
by foreign acquisitions of wealth. And lastly, to 
extend the political influence of the Company 
without enlarging their territory or dividing their 
military strength. 

I need not repeat the means which were used to 
accomplish these ends. The present government 
has proceeded on principles diametrically opposite 
to mine. First, they have broken all the arrange- 
ments which I made in the Nabob’s family in 
1772 ; replaced Mahommed Reza Cawn ; restored 
the office of Naib Suba ; dismissed the Begum 
from her office, which I had assigned her for the ex- 
press and sole purpose of guarding the Company’s 
authority against encroachment or competition ; 
publicly proclaimed the Nabob’s sovereignty, and 
disclaimed that of the Company. Secondly, they 
have made their own power uncontrolled, and 
contrived to preclude its operations from public 
view, by the pretended independency granted to 
Mahommed Reza Cawn. Thirdly, they have 
abolished, or rendered of no effect, all the courts of 
justice, and avow their intentions of restoring the 
collectorships. Fourthly, they exclaimed against 



70 WARREN HASTINGS 

me for overcharging the revenue, though I (I mean, 
whenever I speak of myself, the late administra- 
tion) struck off every oppressive article of it, and 
let the lands on lower terms than the jumna of 
former years, but such only as the lands, under 
favourable circumstances, might very well bear, 
allowing for accidents of drought and inundation, 
which might entitle the farmers to indulgences. 
These indulgences, whenever they could prove 
their title to them, I always granted. The majority 
allow of none ; but while they declare the reiats 
oppressed, refuse to consent to a single remission 
wluch might relieve them. One instance may 
serve to show the spirit with which they conduct 
themselves on this occasion. Rajah Cheyton Sing, 
the zemindar of Bissenpoor, had a writ out against 
him for a debt. He was actually in the charge of 
the sheriff’s officer. To prevent his being brought 
in that disgraceful state to Calcutta, or being 
thrown into jail, I obtained an order from the 
under-sheriff for his present discharge, offering my- 
self as the security for his appearance in Calcutta. 
As soon as the Board met, I informed them of 
what I had done, and recommended to them to 
take the Rajah under the protection of the Board, 
and to assist him in his suit, as this was the first 
instance ; and the decision of it, if favourable to 
the zemindar, by declaring him exempted from 
the jurisdiction of the Court, would serve as a 
precedent in all similar cases. They rejected my 
proposal ; said that, as I had bailed the zemindar 
without any authority from the Board, I must 
stand to the consequences ; that they would not 
interfere, but let the law take its course, that the 
Company might see what dangerous strides the 



71 


TO LAURENCE SULLIVAN, 1776 

Supreme Court were taking to assume an absolute 
power over the country. Sixthly, they have 
branded the suspension of the King’s tribute with 
the appellation of violation of public faith ; they 
have called the cession of Corah the sale of others’ 
property ; they have called the subsidy which I 
had fixed with the Vizier at 210,000 rupees (and 
which they have augmented to 260,000 rupees), 
and the stipulation for the Rohilla war, a mer- 
cenary prostitution of the Company’s arms for 
hire ; they have paid ofi a part of the bonded 
debt with the means furnished by these acts of in- 
justice, and now lay claim to the whole merit of it, 
though it is impossible for them to produce a single 
instance, in the whole period of their administra- 
tion, of a rupee saved, or a rupee gained, by any 
measure of theirs, except the late acquisition of 
Benares, obtained at the expense of twice the 
amount of its yearly revenue, which the Nabob of 
Oude owes to the Company, and which he can never 
pay them. Lastly, by their pernicious interference 
in the affairs of Bombay, and by the weakness of 
their measures in the treaty with the Nabob of 
Oude, and their subsequent conduct to him, they 
perverted the great controlling powers of this 
government to a means of contracting the Com- 
pany’s infiuence, and of annihilating every advan- 
tage which the former servants of the Company 
had secured for them beyond the limits of Bengal. 

The distracted state of the province of Oude 
exceeds description. The Nabob’s character you 
will learn from universal report. His minister, 
Moeteiza Cawn, is possessed of all his master’s 
vices, with an ordinary share of understanding, 
and is in possession of the country, with every 



72 


WAEREN HASTINGS 


place of trust and profit in it. The Nabob’s finances 
and resources are totally exhausted. His troops 
are disaffected to a man. They have been per* 
nodtted to oppose his authority in instances of the 
most criminal disobedience, and the only severity 
which has been ever exercised towards them was in 
the massacre of 20,000 of his sepoys (at least 
Bristow computes the loss at that amount) who 
mutinied for their pay. This horrid event passed 
about a month ago. Happily the presence of our 
brigade serves to check the intestine commotions 
of his country, and he has no present enemy to 
throw the materials, which his misconduct has 
accumulated for his own destruction, into a blaze. 
The smallest spark of foreign troubles will certainly 
blow him up. 

I have already been so exceedingly prolix on the 
preceding subjects, that I shall be more concise on 
the affairs of Bombay, Mr. Taylor ^ tells me that 
he has already written to you a very minute 
detail of all the transactions both of that govern- 
ment and of this in relation to the Mahratta 
war. I shall, therefore, chiefly dwell on my own 
part in it. 

I have always considered the capture of Salsette 
as an act of necessity, and of good policy, nor 
inconsistent with the most rigid principles of 
political justice. 

I never approved of the treaty with Ragobah, 
nor the precipitate measure of the war undertaken 
without a force or treasure to support it, without 
a plan of conduct, and with little necessity and 
less profit to require it. But as it is almost im- 

* An agent sent from Bombay to protest against the 
abrupt intervention of the Bengal Government. 



73 


TO LAURENCE SULLIVAN, 1776 

possible to withdraw from a war before the 
conclusion of it with honour or safety, had it 
rested with me I would have directed them 
to prosecute their original design by escorting 
Ragobah to Poona, and to get clear of the war as 
soon as they could with honour and safety. But 
I was not in a situation to dictate, and the 
language of the majority was to order the Presi- 
dency of Bombay to withdraw their forces im- 
mediately, and without any reservation. All the 
good that I could do was by temporizing. I 
therefore advised that an order should be sent to 
withdraw the army, but I proposed to qualify the 
order with the following exceptions : — 1st. That 
the safety of the troops might be endangered by 
it. 2nd. That any decisive advantage had been 
gained over the enemy ; and, thirdly, that a 
negotiation had taken place. In either of these 
cases I proposed that the order should not have 
effect. The majority adopted the first exception, 
but rejected the other two. I from the first advised, 
and repeatedly urged them to send supplies both 
of men and money to Bombay, as the only means 
of commanding a peace or enabling the gentlemen 
of Bombay to renew the war with advantage. In 
this opinion I was supported by Mr. Barwell. The 
war is now renewed, as might have been expected, 
at a season in which it is impossible to assist them 
either with men or money. We have, indeed, sent 
them eighty men and five lacs of rupees, but the 
ships which carry these little aids are not yet gone, 
nor can possibly arrive before the rains. We have 
given them permission to draw upon us for five 
lacs more. 

If the decided union of the English in every part 
D 3 



74 


WARREN HASTraGS 


of India with Ragobah should establish his credit, 
and give partizans to his cause, which is not unlikely, 
and if the war is well conducted, it is most probable 
that it will be concluded in this campaign ; and if 
it is, you will certainly hear of it before you receive 
this letter. If you do not hear of it, you may 
conclude that the war is protracted to the next 
season, and I think the issue of it will then depend 
on Bengal, and will require all its exertions. 

Such as I have described it is the present state 
of this government, and I presume that it is un- 
necessary to add other proofs of the necessity of 
deciding the authority which shall rule it, and 
apply the remedies to so many complicated dis- 
orders. I do not believe that any part of the 
conduct of General Clavering, Colonel Monson, 
and Mr. Francis, or any proofs that they have given 
of their integrity or abilities, will operate to my 
prejudice, or recommend them for the charge of 
such a state. Nevertheless, even a determination 
in their favour would be better than to leave 
things as they are, for while every proposition 
which comes before the Board of whatever nature 
receives the tincture of- party, even the absolute 
authority which they possess must prove in- 
sufficient to conduct them with consistency 
through their own measures or designs. 

My respectable friend. Sir Elijah, has under- 
taken to give my plan for the better administra- 
tion of justice, which went by the last ship, and 
which I hope you have read, the form of an act of 
parliament, and I hope he will be able to complete 
it in time for it to go by this packet. All the 
judges approve of it, and I like it myself, which 
is not always the case with my own productions. 



75 


TO LAURENCE SULLIVAN, 1776 

I cannot wish to deceive you, and you will think 
better of me than to suspect me of endeavouring 
to make you the instrument of deceiving others. 
With this preface I assure you that it is scarce 
possible to have acted with more moderation or 
caution than Sir Elijah has observed in all cases 
in which the ordinary process of Supreme Court 
was likely to affect the collection and management 
of the public revenue. Indeed, the other judges 
merit the same testimony in their favour. Had 
a cordial understanding subsisted between the 
Court and the Council, much of the inconvenience 
that has arisen from the writs of the Court would 
have been avoided, nor would the revenue have 
been in the least affected by them ; but it seems 
to have been a maxim of the Board to force the 
Court into extremities for the purpose of finding 
fault with them. Yet in many cases the acts of 
the Court have been, and must continue to be, the 
unavoidable cause of embarrassment. This is owing 
to a defect in its constitution. By the limita- 
tion of its powers it must ever remain a doubt 
what is the extent of them, as every man in the 
provinces is in reality subjected to the authority 
of the Company. If it was constituted to protect 
the people from oppression, that design would be 
entirely frustrated were the Board at liberty to 
employ agents who should be exempt from its 
authority ; and you will have seen many instances 
in the papers which I have sent home of the most 
glaring acts of oppression committed by the Board 
which would have produced the ruin of the parties 
over whom they were exercised but for the pro- 
tection of the Court. Great complaints have been 
made of zemindars and others, who are not liable 



76 


WARREN HASTINGS 


to the jurisdiction of the Court by the plain con- 
struction of the Act, having been arrested, and 
some thrown into prison by its warrants. But 
no attention has been paid to the necessity which 
there is of bringing the persons who are even 
excluded by the Act from the jurisdiction of the 
Court in the same way before it to establish their 
exemption. They may plead to its jurisdiction, 
and obtain their discharge ; but till this is done, 
I cannot see how it is possible to make the dis- 
tinction, for if every man who declared himself to 
be no British subject, nor employed by any, was, 
in virtue of his own declaration, to be exempted 
from their authority, all men would make the plea. 
Their right to this exemption must be tried to be 
known, and they must be compelled to appear, 
or give bail for their appearance, that it may be 
tried. 

The truth is, that a thing done by halves is worse 
than if it were not done at all . The powers of the 
Court must be universal, or it would be better to 
repeal them altogether. The attempt to make a 
distinction has introduced the most glaring 
absurdities and contradictions into the Act which 
virtually declares the British sovereignty over the 
provinces even in the qualifications which are made 
use of to limit it. It is declared that the jurisdic- 
tion of the Court shall be exercised over all British 
subjects, and over all who are, or ever were, in the 
employ of British subjects, that is over those who 
are not British subjects, and of course have no 
relation or dependence on the British sovereignty, 
which is thus usurped over them. Even in the 
most ordinary process of the Court, the dis- 
tinction must be broken through or all its acts 



77 


TO LAURENCE SULLIVAN, 1776 

impeded. The issuing of subpoenas to witnesses 
is as much an act of authority as warrants of capias, 
and the parties on whom they are served must be 
liable to penalties in case of disobedience ; yet it 
would be the extreme of absurdity to say that no 
man should be compelled to appear as an evidence 
who was not a British subject, because it would be 
impossible in such a case to administer justice ; 
and it is equally a contradiction to say that the 
persons over whom the authority of the British 
law is thus exercised are not amenable to it. 

I hope that my plan will be found to provide the 
most effectual relief against all the imperfections 
of the Act as it now stands. On the one hand, it 
proposes to give to the Supreme Court an unlimited 
(but not exclusive) authority over all ; and on the 
other, it provides for the administration of justice 
in all cases to which its jurisdiction cannot con- 
veniently extend, without the danger of a com- 
petition with it. In this coalition of the British 
judicature with the Dewanny, the latter will 
obtain a more steady and confirmed authority 
than it has yet ever possessed ; and being open to 
the daily inspection and control of the judges, the 
Dewanny Courts will acquire a more regular and 
legal form than they could have if left to them- 
selves. But I trust the design will best speak for 
itself, for it has at least the merit of simplicity and 
precision, if it possesses no other. One only 
alteration has been made in it in the draft which 
Sir Elijah is making for me. The superintendent 
of the Court, called Adawlut Dewanny Zillajaut, 
who was proposed to be a member of the Provincia 
Council, as is now the case, holding that office by 
rotation, is now proposed to be an independent 



78 


WARREN HASTINGS 


officer (I mean independent of the Provincial 
Council), and to be removable only for misconduct 
or by voluntary resignation ; and he is to be the 
judge of all causes that do not immediately regard 
the revenues (as disputes between farmers, and 
other proprietors or agents of the collections), 
which are left to the Provincial Councils. 

Mem . — The Superintendent at present holds his 
office in monthly rotation. My plan lengthens it 
to a year. Mr. Chambers, on the same grounds, 
suggested the propriety of making it perpetual, 
and to be held by a person not a member of the 
Provincial Council, which I immediately adopted, 
the Chief Justice concurring in the same opinion. 

There is one point which makes me dread ex- 
ceedingly the bad effects of a longer continuance 
of the present scene of disorder. The five years’ 
settlement expires in March 1777. Many previous 
arrangements ought to be made some time before 
the new settlement takes place. I would, had I 
power, begin them now, but nothing can be done 
by the present government, which has no principle 
but that of faction to guide it, and God help this 
country if it is decided that it shall be left to such 
rulers. 

I have already made my letter of so enormous a 
size, that I ought in conscience to put an end to it ; 
but I have been long used to treat you as the 
confidential repository of my thoughts as they 
flow warm from my imagination in their natural 
order, and without correction or reserve, and I 
have one matter still remaining which is too nearly 
connected with my own feelings to be suppressed. 

I had lately occasion to look over my letters, 
which were written before the new government 



79 


TO LAURENCE SULLIVAN, 1776 

took place, to the Court of Directors, and other 
papers which were written before that period 
either in recommendation of my own measures, 
or in refutation of the objections which were made 
to them. I was struck with the contrast of my 
own mode of conduct with that of General Claver- 
ing and his associates in a more steady adherence 
to one principle than I myself had ever before 
suspected, having conformed to it more from the 
prevailing bent of my own disposition, than from 
attention to it as a fixed rule of action. 

I believe it will be admitted that the govern- 
ment of Bengal never underwent a greater number 
of variety of changes in all its departments than in 
the short interval of time in which I presided in it. 
It seems almost a necessary consequence that new 
measures imply that the old are wrong, and of 
course the authors of them deficient either in 
integrity, ability, or attention. What a field for 
personal obloquy was this for a man whose feelings 
might be woimded by the personal successes of 
men wealthier than himself, or whose spirit could 
descend to undermine the reputations of others 
for the sake of building his own on their ruins 1 

It is with a pride of heart, in which, if I know 
yours, it will join, that I can now declare that in all 
the time which I have been speaking of, I never, 
either in my public minutes or letters, or in my 
separate addresses to the Court of Directors, or 
their Secret Committee, to whom I could have 
written what I pleased without the hazard of a 
reply from those whose conduct I might have 
impeached ; nor, I verily believe, in any part of 
my private correspondence, made use of any 
argument or assertion which could be imputed to 



80 


WARREN HASTINGS 


me as proceeding from the least personal ill-will 
to any of my predecessors, or present opponents 
in the service. I do not remember that I had ever 
occasion to make use of the names of either Mr. 
Cartier, Mr. Verelst, or even Lord Clive ; or that 
in the heat of contest (and I have at times had 
strong provocation), I ever suffered my pen to 
express so great a degree of warmth against any 
man as I have shown (and that never with intem- 
perance, at least I hope not) in private explana- 
tions. Sir Robert Barker, Graham, and Barwell 
are instances of this. These gentlemen might find 
much cause to be pleased with what I have written 
unknown to them, but none (I am sure) to complain 
that I have ever used their names to their dis- 
credit. 

My conduct to the inferior servants of the 
Company has been marked with the same modera- 
tion. Many sources of profit were shut up, and 
strict rules made for contingent disbursements, 
which at one time rendered me very unpopular ; 
but I am told that those who were most offended 
at these restraints now do me the justice to 
acknowledge their necessity, and to testify that in 
enforcing them, I never suffered myself to be 
biased by partiality or prejudice to any man. 

Many of my letters to the Company, and many 
of a private nature, but addressed to persons of 
high rank, or great influence, have treated of the 
disorders and irregularities of the service, but 
these I have always attributed (as in my heart I 
still do) to a defective constitution, not to a 
depravity of principle in the servants of the 
Company. 

To conclude, whatever may be the lot perhaps 



81 


TO LAURENCE SULLIVAN, 1776 

already assigned me, I am certain that if ever I am 
compelled to submit my conduct to the public, my 
character will stand as fair in their eyes, and my 
integrity as unblemished as those of any man who 
ever served the Company, though in abilities I 
may have been exceeded by many. — I am with the 
warmest affection and the truest esteem, dear Sir, 
your faithful and most obedient servant. 

PS. — Since writing the above, all that I have 
said about our Mahratta negotiations is rendered 
of no consequence. The declaration of the Poona 
ministers proved to be a mere bravado. By a 
letter since received from Colonel Upton, dated 
24:th February, we are informed, that they have 
assented to the treaty with all the conditions 
which he required of them, which amount to little 
more than, that we shall keep Salsette, which we 
have got, and they Bassein which we could not 
take ; I am too much hurried to give you the 
particulars. I have written to Mr. Elliot fully 
upon them, and he will show you my letter. I have 
taken much pains to temper the severity of our 
Board, in their letters to Bombay ; and Mr. 
Taylor, if he has done me justice, 'v^l have told 
you, that he has profited by my advice. You long 
ago knew my wish to see a control given to this 
government over the other Presidencies, but I 
never meant such a control as is now exercised ; 
nor did the Parliament mean it. The Act gives us 
a mere negative power, and no more. It says the 
other Presidencies shall not make war nor treaties 
without the sanction of this government, but care* 
fully guards against every expression which can 
imply a power to dictate what the other Presi^ 
dencies shall do ; much less does it authorize the 



82 WARREN HASTINGS 

Governor-General and Council to make cessions 
and exchange places for the other Presidencies. 
Instead of uniting all the powers of India, all the 
use we have hitherto made of this Act of Parlia- 
ment has been to tease and embarrass. 

12 . Warren Hastings to Alexander Elliot, 
12 January 1777 

My Dear Elliot, 

This letter will comprise one connected subject ; 
and to render this intelligible, I shall take it up 
from a very early period. 

After the famous defeat of the Mahrattas at 
Ponniput, Sudaba, the second officer in command, 
and the first cousin of Ragonaut Row or Ragoba, 
the late Peshwa and competitor of the ministers of 
Poona, was missing, and supposed to have been 
slain. About three years after, a man disfigured 
with wounds made his appearance, under the name 
of Sudaba, with a small force ; was attacked and 
defeated, made prisoner, and exposed as an 
impostor by the ruling Peshwa. From that time 
he continued a prisoner till the month of April last, 
when he escaped from his confinement, collected 
a considerable army, and even made himself master 
of all the country called Concan, which lies between 
the hills and the sea. On the 27th of October he 
ventured on an engagement with the forces of the 
actual government, was totally routed, put to sea in 
a small vessel, and sailed to the island of Bombay, 
where he demanded protection. Unfortunately for 
him, the governor and second in command were 
both absent at Salsette, and Dr. Draper, who had 
charge of the fort, sending two persons of inferior 



83 


TO ALEXANDER ELLIOT, 1777 

rank to receive him, the devoted fugitive construed 
this into an insult, and in a fit of ill-timed pride 
instantly departed, threw himself into the hands of 
a Mahratta chief named Ragoojee Angria, who 
delivered him up a prisoner to the ministers of 
Poona. Ragonaut Row, more fortunate, escaped 
to Bombay, where he was received, and probably 
continues there. It is said that Mr. Hornby, on 
the first news of Sudaba’s confinement, sent a 
deputation to Ragoojee Angria to demand him, 
with a declaration of war in case of a refusal. 
Such, at least, is the representation of this affair 
which we have received from Poona, where both 
this measure and the asylum granted to Ragoba 
are treated as acts of hostility against the Mahratta 
state and direct infringements of the treaty. We 
too have taken up the charges as such, and sent 
peremptory orders to the Presidency of Bombay 
to dismiss Ragonaut Row. In the meantime 
Colonel Upton continues, notwithstanding our 
repeated orders for his recall, at Poona, whether by 
his free consent or by constraint is uncertain. The 
style both of his letters and those of the Peshwa 
seems to confirm the common report of his being 
detained by force. This is not the only suspicious 
circumstance. All the letters from Poona, both 
before and since the ratification of the treaty, are 
filled with reproaches for the hostile acts which 
preceded it, and even strong indications that the 
authors of them did not regard the treaty as 
binding but on the persons only who signed it. 
Their last letters, which were written immediately 
after the overthrow of Sudaba, contain a demand 
in behalf of the King of Tanjore, whose name 
never before appeared in any papers of their 



84 


WARREN HASTINGS 


correspondence or the negotiation with Colonel 
Upton. These are, at best, but doubtful symptoms ; 
and, added to the indisposition which the Presi- 
dency of Bombay have all along shown to the late 
treaty, portend but a short duration to the peace 
concluded by it. 

By the overthrow of Sudaba, the intestine 
troubles which have so long disturbed the Mahratta 
state appear to have been so far appeased as to 
leave them at full leisure to prosecute remote 
undertakings. The same letters that brought us 
the news of this event also informed us that the 
ministers had set on foot an expedition against 
Hyder Ally. By other channels we learn that 
Nizam Ally Cawn and Moodajee Boosla, the Rajah 
of Berar, have been invited and have agreed to 
join their forces on this occasion. 

So sudden a revival and reunion of the powers 
of this great empire, and so sudden an application 
of them immediately on the close of a long civil 
war, indicate a degree of vigour in its constitution 
which cannot fail to alarm the friends of the 
Company, if the subsequent appearances shall 
warrant this conclusion. I think they will not, 
but persuade myself that the present conjuncture 
is no less favourable than any of the past (always 
excepting the ill-fated treaty with Ragoba) for 
advancing the interests of the Company, and 
extending their influence and connexions. I will 
tell you why. 

In the first place, a confederacy formed between 
the Peshwa, the Subadar of Deccan, who has 
plundered the Mahrattas of a great part of the 
Poona state, and the Chief of Berar, its nominal 
vassal, all possessing mutual claims on each other, 



85 


TO ALEXANDER ELLIOT, 1777 

and swayed by opposite interests, cannot hold 
long together. In the second, the government of 
Poona is weak in itself, by want of constitutional 
authority in those who possess the rule of it, and 
by want of unanimity among themselves. Nana 
Maraba Furneess, one of their principal members, 
has openly separated himself from the rest. Their 
chief, Succaram Babboo, is old and infirm ; and 
both he and Nana Furneess, who are the only 
parties to the treaty lately ' concluded with us in 
the name of the Mahratta state, lately demanded 
and received passports from the government to 
retire to Benares, with the avowed design of 
passing the remainder of their lives there in 
devotion. This design, though probably suggested 
only by the personal dangers to which they were 
exposed by the rapid successes of Sudaba, must 
diminish the confidence and respect which are the 
natural attendants of a fixed and regular authority. 
And thirdly, the government of Berar possesses in 
it the seeds of civil discord, which are at this time 
ready to spring uj) on the first occasion that can 
favour their growth. This is a sulnect that 
requires me to be more explicit than I nave been 
on others, and this too I must take up ah ovo. 

Ragoojee Boosla, the Rajah of Berar, the same 
person who invaded Bengal, and subjected it to 
the Chout in the time of the Nabob Alliverdy 
Cawn, dying, left four sons, Jannoojee, Shabajee, 
Moodajee, and Bimbajee. Jannoojee succeeded 
him.^ He, having no child, adopted the son of 
Moodajee, who was called by the name of his 
grandfather, Ragooj ee. On the death of J annoo j ee, 
Shabajee, the second brother, succeeded to the 
government, but held it in the name of his nephew. 



86 


WARREN HASTINGS 


the legal heir. This was the cause of continual 
dissensions between the two brothers — Shaba jee 
holding the government in right of primogeniture, 
Moodaje,e claiming it on the behalf of his own son, 
though the legal aflinity between them was 
changed by his elder brother’s adoption. In the 
late dissensions between Ragonaut Row and the 
ministers of Poona, Shaba jee took part with the 
former, and Moodajee with the latter ; but their 
own afiairs calling them home before those were 
decided, they came to an open rupture. Shaba jee 
was slain, and his brother assumed the government 
in his stead. 

Here I must go back to relate another transac- 
tion more immediately connected with the subject 
of this letter. Shabajee, a little before his return 
to Berar, sent a Vackeel, named Beneram Pundit, 
to Calcutta, with a letter containing professions of 
friendship and a desire to be on terms of alliance 
with this government. I thought this an occasion 
not to be slighted, and returned such an answer as 
was most proper to encourage the wishes of Shabajee 
without expressing too interested a solicitude to 
meet them ; and I sent the Vackeel back big with 
the project of uniting the province of Berar to this 
government on terms similar to those which had 
been formed with Sujah Dowla by the treaty 
concluded at Benares, and which I may venture 
to say were such as afforded the Company every 
advantage that could be derived from such an 
alliance without derogating from the dignity or 
credit of our ally. 

While Beneram was on his return, the revolu- 
tion took place which I have mentioned above ; 
and as he was known to be the confidential servant 



87 


TO ALEXANDER ELLIOT, 1777 

of Shaba jee, some time elapsed before he ventured 
to return to his new master. Being at length, 
however, invited to come, he went and was well 
received. Moodajee read the letters, and answered 
them as addressed to himself ; and after some 
time, thought proper to send him back in his former 
character, with handsome professions, but general, 
and with no declared object or instructions. A 
very friendly, and in some sort confidential, 
correspondence, however, has continued between 
us ever since. From Beneram Pundit, I learn that 
the same feuds which formerly divided the two 
brothers while Shabajee was living, are now likely 
to break out between Moodajee and his son, who 
is now about nineteen years of age, and begins to 
look upon his father as the usurper of his rights. 
In these sentiments he has been confirmed by a 
man who has been the successive minister of the 
three brothers, named Dewaugur Pundit, who 
finds himself of too little consequence with his 
present master, and naturally concludes that he 
shall acquire a greater ascendant on the mind of 
his young pupil, if he should succeed in obtaining 
his advancement to the possession of the govern- 
ment. By the intrigues of this man, Nizam Ally 
has been induced to invite Moodajee Boosla to his 
court, for the purpose of concerting measures for 
their common interests, or to send his Dewan if 
he should be prevented from attending himself. 
To the last proposition Moodajee has consented, 
as he mentions in a letter I have lately received 
from him ; and I understand that it is proposed 
that Ragojee shall accompany him, with the 
secret design of gaining the support of Nizam Ally 
in the prosecution of the projects against Moodajee. 



88 


WARREN HASTINGS 


Whatever may be the issue of these measures, a 
proper attention to the circumstances as, they arise 
might put it easily in the power of this government, 
were it . duly authorized, to convert them to the 
advantage of the Company without any sacrifice 
of their faith or hazard of their interests. 

We have a battalion of sepoys already stationed 
in the districts bordering on Berar, and another 
added to it would be sufficient to answer any 
purpose for which they might be wanted. 

It is impossible to foresee the circumstances on 
which our interposition may be demanded, or on 
which it could be honourably given, and therefore 
impossible to anticipate the mode of it. 

You are already well acquainted, however, with 
the general system which 1 wish to be empowered 
to establish in India, namely, to extend the 
influence of the British nation to every part of 
India not too remote from their possessions, 
without enlarging the circle of their defence or 
involving them in hazardous or indefinite engage- 
ments, and to accept of the allegiance of such of 
our neighbours as shall sue to be enlisted among 
the friends and allies of the King of Great 
Britain. The late Naboob Sujah Dowla, who 
wanted neither pride nor understanding, would 
have thought it an honour to be called the 
Vizier of the King of England, and offered at 
one time to coin siccas in His Majesty’s name. 
Nor was this a mere visionary project ; the credit 
of such a connexion with the sovereign of a power 
which has for a long time past made so considerable 
a figure in Hindustan would of itself be a great 
advantage. But I am afraid that his chief induce- 
ment arose from a great defect in our political 



89 


TO ALEXANDER ELLIOT, 1771 

constitution, of which he had severely felt the bad 
effects ; I mean the rapid succession of persons 
entrusted (under whatever name or character) 
with the rule and administration of the British 
affairs in this part of our Indian possessions ; the 
consequent want of consistency in their measures, 
and even in their attachments and engagements ; 
and the caprices to which he was often exposed on 
the same account. Had he possessed the spirit of 
foresight, he would have had severe cause for these 
reflections in the miserable state of penury and 
servitude to which his son has been since reduced, 
ineffectually to our interests, as every excess of 
power beyond its proper bounds will ever defeat 
its own purposes. Nor indeed has the son much 
cause to complain of an injury which he has scarce 
sense or sensibility to discover ; although it must 
be redressed whenever that state has a more 
worthy ruler, and the sovereignty restored with all 
its rights unimpaired to the lawful proprietor. 
But I wander from my subject. My intention in 
this digression is to show the advantages which 
would be derived both by Government and its 
allies from a direct engagement with them, made 
with the sanction of the ifcng’s name, which would 
secure it from wanton and licentious violation 
and render the objects of it more certain and 
durable. 

On this footing I would replace the subaship of 
Oude. On this footing I would establish an alliance 
with Berar. These countries are of more impor- 
tance to us than any others from their contiguity 
to ours, and therefore it is of consequence to settle 
their connexion with us before that of any other. 
But the same system might be rendered more 



90 WARREN HASTINGS 

extensive by time, and the observance of a steady 
principle of conduct, and an invariable attachment 
to formal engagements. 

I will not here enumerate all the advantages 
which may be derived from this plan to you 
especially, to whom I have long ago explained 
personally my views and sentiments upon this 
subject. Indeed, except a short and rather obscure 
intimation of it in one of my letters to Lord North, 
I have communicated it to no person but Colonel 
MacLeane and yourself ; and that is my principal 
reason among others for having written to you 
rather than any one else upon the various points 
contained in this letter. To enable me to carry it 
into execution, I must be released from the 
restrictions which I at present lie under ; I must 
have discretionary powers, and a fixed channel of 
correspondence. 

I shall follow the subject no further, but leave 
it here to your discretion to make such use of it as 
you shall judge most likely to prove effectual to 
its execution, or to suppress it. I am aware that 
I tread on dangerous ground, exposed to the ill-will 
of the Company, if they look to the renewal of their 
Charter, and to all the popular and rooted pre- 
judices which are entertained against the expensive 
projects of military enterprise, and the injustice 
of disturbing the peace of our quiet neighbours ; 
for this construction will be given to it. To answer 
these and the other objections to this plan would 
require much time and argument ; but though 
this might be necessary to the support of a pro- 
position calculated for the public eye, it will not be 
wanted on this occasion, as I hope it will be only 
seen by those who are to adopt it, and to whom its 



91 


TO ALEXANDER ELLIOT, 1777 

obvious consequences will need little explanation. 
I trust it to you in confidence, and desire that you 
will impart it with the same caution, that I may 
not suffer by the attempts to raise the power of my 
country, and to extend the influence of the King’s 
name among nations to which it is yet unknown, 
if the means which I have recommended should 
be judged inadequate to such laudable ends, or 
impolitic with respect to other circumstances. 
Of their justice and moral propriety I have no 
doubt. I am ever, my dear Elliot, your most 
affectionate friend. 


10th February 1777. 

My Dear Elliot, 

The accompanying letter was written and in- 
tended for the last dispatch. It contains the par- 
ticular application of a system with which you are 
already well acquainted. Whatever my own con- 
viction may be of its expediency, I am tied down 
from acting directly, nor can I employ even 
influence with the rod of authority hanging over 
my head. 

Nor is this my only difficulty. I cannot com- 
municate a subject of this nature through any 
official channel. If I write to the Secret Committee, 
they are too many to be entrusted with it. They 
may not all be disposed to receive a proposition 
from me with candour ; and bodies of men, how- 
ever small, are always indifferent to the business 
which is brought regularly before them. I cannot 
write to the Chairman, because, in the first place, 
I know not who he is ; and in the second, because 
the gentlemen who hold the first stations in the 
Direction at this time, are, as I understand, my 



92 


WARREN HASTINGS 


professed enemies, and would be therefore more 
likely to draw conclusions from what I wrote to 
my disadvantage than to adopt my recommenda- 
tions. Neither can I approach the King’s minister 
on such an occasion without some preparatory 
caution, in which his leisure, his inclinations, and 
the ability of the times should be consulted. 

It is impossible for me to foresee what may be 
the dispositions in England when this letter shall 
arrive. It is equally impossible to reconcile the 
difEerent orders which the Court of Directors last 
year gave us for our conduct towards the powers 
of India. They desire us upon no account to enter 
into any wars, however advantageous to the 
Company, and they at the same time direct us to 
co-operate with the Presidency of Bombay in 
keeping possession of the lands which Ragobah 
ceded to them by treaty. The first is an absolute 
prohibition to interfere in the politics of India. 
The last is a positive order to interfere, and to 
engage in a war with the first power in India. 

Being thus at a loss to judge of the views of the 
Court of Directors, I am still more so to judge of 
those of the King, to the knowledge of which I 
have no access. 1 must therefore leave it to you 
to consider well the disposition of the times, and 
of the ministers. If you have reason to believe 
that such a system as I have recommended will be 
approved, I trust to you to make use of such means 
as you shall judge most likely to promote it. If, on 
the contrary, men’s minds are adverse to the 
extension of our influence, you had best say nothing 
about it, as it can serve no good purpose, and may 
be turned to my disadvantage. 

These dispatches I shall entrust to Captain 



93 


TO ALEXANDER ELLIOT, 1777 

Toone. You know his worth, and my aSection for 
him, I have earnestly recommended his return 
if he can recover his constitution ; and if your 
interest can promote his views you will oblige me 
by serving him. I am ever, my dear Elliot, your 
most affectionate friend. 

PS. — Sudaba, who is mentioned in the accom- 
panying letter, has been put to death, having been 
beaten with clubs till he expired. This, you know, 
is not murder, but simple manslaughter by the 
doctrine of Abbi Haneefa ; but seems to have 
been done by these Hindoos to avoid the shedding 
of sacred blood ; an argument in favour of Sudaba ’s 
cause. 

For a fuller explanation of the design, which is 
contained in my letters of the 12th ultimo, I have 
drawn it up with as much accuracy as my time 
would allow in a methodical form in the enclosed 
sheets, which I trust to your discretion to make 
such use of as you think proper. It is yet incom- 
plete, as I could only venture to propose what I 
saw a moral certainty of accomplishing. In the 
natural operation of such an influence once 
established many important objects will start up 
which it is impossible to foresee, and many which, 
though within the reach of conjecture, would 
appear visionary if formally detailed. I have no 
fear of its failing to produce the good effects which 
I have described, nor even much greater. The 
only danger which I should apprehend would be 
from the attempt to make the most of it that 
could be made. The rapacity of individuals, and 
the emulation of those in actual power to surpass 
their predecessors, will ever prove the greatest 
evils of our political system. Our alliance with 



94 


WARREN HASTINGS 


the Nabob of Oude is a striking illustration of this. 
It was in the beginning an unprofitable charge to 
the Company. It was placed on a footing of mutual 
advantage to both. It is now become an oppressive 
burthen on that province, which must soon fall 
with increased weight on the Company. The late 
Vizier paid to the Company a tribute of 25,20,000 
rupees, and cheerfully paid it. It was optional, 
because he was at liberty to dismiss the brigade 
when the exigency of his affairs no longer required 
it ; and he could safely dispense with it. The 
present Nabob has yielded up a revenue of twenty- 
three lacs in the cession of Benares ; he pays, or 
rather ought to pay, 31,20,000 rupees a year for 
the subsidy ; and we have added to his expenses 
an extravagant military establishment which, at 
its estimated amount, is an annual charge of above 
forty lacs. So that we are in fact the distributors 
of a crore of rupees drawn from his treasury, which 
is already exhausted, and that part of his army 
which still remains under his own direction is ren- 
dered a useless and even dangerous encumbrance, 
because he cannot pay it. Our brigade, therefore, 
must continue a fixture^ to that province, which 
would be a prey to the meanest invader the instant 
that it was deprived of its support. 

Many of the propositions in this scheme require 
explanation. This you can give, but I have no 
time, and I have already made it too long. Nudjif 
tJawn’s pension is due in justice to him, as he quitted 
us unwillingly, and followed the King at the 
express solicitation of the commander-in-chief of 
our army. He has ever proved faithful to us^ and 
possesses such resources in his military talents, 
and in the credit of them, that while he lives he 



95 


TO ALEXANDER ELLIOT, 1777 

will be our best shield against the only enemy which 
we have to dread in that quarter, the Mahrattas. 
He has no money, and can therefore pay no 
subsidy, and whenever he dies, we must look to 
other means of defence on that frontier of our 
possessions and those of our ally. 

If peace is to be our object, I cannot devise a 
more likely way to ensure it than to command all 
the means of war, and this is the only use I would 
wish even to make of the plan which I have pro- 
posed, if it is adopted while I remain here. This, 
I suppose, will not be long, I wish it not, unless I 
possess power and confidence, and shall be better 
pleased to be recalled at once than to remain with 
a doubtful authority till the short time is passed 
which has been allotted me by ^Parliament, and 
then go out of course. I would not accept of an 
empire on such terms. If I must give the place to 
General Clavering, he will revenge the injustice 
done me by it, if I could seek such a revenge ; and 
if a new member is added in the room of Colonel 
Monson, I shall expect the renewal of the same 
violences which I have already experienced, for I 
cannot hope that the chpice will fall on a friend of 
mine. Besides, it is not in nature for five men to 
share the same power, and not to divide into fac- 
tions, when one man can always make a majority. 

13. East India Company Act, 1784 ^ 

(24 Geo, III, s. 2, c. 25) 

An Act for the better regulation and manage- 
ment of the affairs of the East India Company, 
and of the British possessions in India ; and 
for establishing a Court of Judicature for the 



96 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

more speedy and effectual trial of persons 

accused of offences committed in the East 

Indies. 

For the better government and security of the 
territorial possessions of this kingdom in the East 
Indies, be it enacted by the King’s most excellent 
Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the 
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in 
this present Parliament assembled, and by the 
authority of the same. That it shall and may be 
lawful to and for the King’s Majesty, his heirs 
and successors, by any commission to be issued 
under the great seal of Great Britain, to nominate 
and appoint such persons, not exceeding six in 
number, as His Majesty shall think fit, being of 
His Majesty’s most honourable Privy Council, of 
whom one of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries 
of State for the time being, and the Chancellor of 
the Exchequer for the time being, shall be two, to 
be, and who shall accordingly be. Commissioners 
for the affairs of India. 

II. And be it further enacted by the authority 
aforesaid, that any number, not less than three of 
the said Commissioners, shall form a Board for 
executing the several powers which, by this or any 
other act, shall be vested in the Commissioners 
aforesaid. 

HI. And be it further enacted, that the said 
Secretary of State, and, in his absence, the said 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and, in the absence 
of both of them, the senior of the said other Com- 
missioners, according to his rank in seniority of 
appointment, shall preside at, and be president of 
the said Board ; and that the said Commissioners 
shall have, and they are hereby invested with, the 



EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT 1784 97 

superintendence and control over all the British 
territorial possessions in the East Indies, and over 
the affairs of the United Company of Merchants 
trading thereto, in manner hereinafter directed. 

IV. And be it further enacted, that in case the 
members present at the said Board shall at any 
time be equally divided in opinion, in respect to 
any matter depending before them, then, and in 
every such case, the then President of the said 
Board shall have two voices, or the casting vote. 

V. And be it further enacted, that it shall and 
may be lawful for the King’s Majesty, his heirs and 
successors, from time to time, at his and their will 
and pleasure, to revoke and determine the Com- 
mission aforesaid, and from time to time to cause 
any new Commission or Commissions to be sealed 
as aforesaid, for appointing any other person or 
persons, being of His Majesty’s most honourable 
Privy Council, of whom, one of his Majesty’s 
principal Secretaries of State, and the Chancellor 
of the Exchequer for the time being, shall always 
be two, to be Commissioners and Members of the 
said Board, when and so often as His Majesty, his 
heirs or successors, shall think fit, so that the 
number of Commissioners therein to be named 
shall in no wise exceed the aforesaid number of six. 

VI. And be it further enacted, that the said 
Board shall be fully authorized and empowered, 
from time to time, to superintend, direct, and 
control, all acts, operations, and concerns, which 
in any wise relate to the civil or military govern- 
ment or revenues of the British territorial posses- 
sions in the East Indies, in the manner hereinafter 
directed. 

XI. And, to the intent that the said Board may 

231 E 



98 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

be duly informed of all transactions of the said 
Company, in respect to the management of their 
concerns in the East Indies ; be it further enacted 
that all the members of the said Board shall, at all 
convenient times, have access to all papers and 
muniments of the said United Company, and shall 
be furnished with such extracts or copies thereof, 
as they shall from time to time require ; and that 
the Court of Directors of the said United Company 
shall, and they are hereby required and directed, 
to deliver to the said Board, copies of all minutes, 
orders, resolutions, and other proceedings, of all 
general and special Courts of Proprietors of the 
said Company, and of the Court of Directors, so far 
as relate to the civil or military government or 
revenues of the British territorial possessions in 
the East Indies, within eight days after the holding 
of such respective Courts ; and also copies of all 
dispatches which the said Directors, or any Com- 
mittee of the said Directors, shall receive from any 
of their servants in the East Indies, immediately 
after the arrival thereof; and also copies of all 
letters, orders, and instructions whatsoever, 
relating to the civil or military government or 
revenues of the British territorial possessions in 
the East Indies, proposed to be sent or dispatched 
by the said Court of Directors, or any Committee 
of the said Directors, to any of the servants of the 
said Company in the East Indies ; and that the 
said Court of Directors of the said United Company 
shall, and they are hereby required to, pay due 
obedience to, and shall be governed and boimd by, 
such orders and directions as they shall from time 
to time receive from the said Board, touching the 
civil or military government and revenues of 



EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 99 

the British territorial possessions in the East 
Indies. 

XII. And be it further enacted, that, within 
fourteen days after the receipt of such copies last- 
mentioned, the said Board shall return the same 
to the said Court of Directors, with their appro- 
bation thereof, subscribed by three of the members 
of the said Board, or their reasons at large for 
disapproving the same, together with instructions 
from the said Board to the said Court of Directors, 
in respect thereto ; and that the said Court of 
Directors shall thereupon dispatch and send the 
letters, orders, and instructions so approved or 
amended, to their servants in India, without further 
delay, unless, on any representation made by the 
said Directors to the said Board, the said Board 
shall direct any alterations to be made in such 
letters, orders, or instructions ; and no letters, 
orders, or instructions, until after such previous 
communication thereof to the said Board, shall 
at any time be sent or dispatched by the said 
Court of Directors to the East Indies, on any 
account or pretence whatsoever. 

XIII. And, for the readier dispatch of the civil 
and military concerns of the said United Company, 
be it further enacted, that whenever the Court of. 
Directors of the said United Company shall neglect 
to transmit to the said Board their intended 
dispatches on any subject, within fourteen days 
after requisition made, it shall and may be lawful 
to and for the said Board to prepare and send to 
the Directors of the East India Company (without 
waiting for the receipt of the copies of dispatches 
intended to be Sent by the said Court of Directors 
as aforesaid) any orders or instructions to any of 



100 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

the governments or presidencies aforesaid, con- 
cerning the civil or military government of the 
British territories and possessions in the East 
Indies ; and the said Directors shall, and they are 
hereby required to transmit dispatches in the 
usual form (pursuant to the tenor of the said 
orders and instructions, so transmitted to them) 
to the respective governments and presidencies in 
India, unless, on any representation made by the 
said Directors to the said Board, touching such 
orders or instructions, the said Board shall direct 
any alteration to be made in the same ; which 
directions the said Court of Directors shall in such 
case be bound to conform to. 

XIV. And be it further enacted, that in case the 
said Board shall send any orders or instructions to 
the said Court of Directors, to be by them trans- 
mitted to India, which, in the opinion of the said 
Court of Directors, shall relate to points not 
connected with the civil or military government 
and revenues of the said territories and possessions 
in India, then, and in any such case, it shall be 
lawful for the said Court of Directors to apply, by 
petition, to His Majesty in Council, touching such 
orders and instructions ; and His Majesty in 
Council shall decide whether the same be, or be 
not, connected with the civil or military govern- 
ment and revenues of the said territories and 
possessions in India ; which decision shall be final 
and conclusive. 

XV. Provided nevertheless, and be it further 
enacted, that if the said Board shall be of opinion 
that the subject matter of any of their deliberations 
concerning the levying of war or making of peace, 
or treating or negotiating with any of the native 



EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 101 

princes or states in India, shall require secrecy, 
it shall and may be lawful for the said Board 
to send secret orders and instructions to the 
Secret Committee of the said Court of Directors 
for the time being, who shall thereupon, without 
disclosing the same, transmit their orders and 
dispatches in the usual form, according to the 
tenor of the said orders and instructions of the 
said Board, to the respective governments and 
presidencies in India ; and that the said govern- 
ments and presidencies shall pay a faithful obedi- 
ence to such orders and dispatches, and shall 
return their answers to the same, sealed (under 
cover) with their respective seals, to the said 
Secret Committee, who shall forthwith communi- 
cate such answers to the said Board. 

XVI. And be it enacted by the authority afore- 
said, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the 
Court of Directors of the said United Company for 
the time being, and they are hereby required, from 
time to time, to appoint a Secret Committee, to 
consist of any number of the said Directors for 
the time being, not exceeding three ; which 
Secret Committee shall, from time to time, upon 
receipt of any such secret orders and instructions 
concerning the levying of war or making of peace, 
or treating or negotiating with any of the native 
princes or states of India, from the said Commis- 
sioners for the Affairs of India, as are hereinbefore 
mentioned, transmit to the respective govern- 
ments and presidencies in India a duplicate or 
duplicates of such orders and instructions, together 
with orders in writing, signed by them the mem- 
bers of the said Secret Committee, to carry the 
same into execution ; and to ail such orders and 



102 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

instructions, so transnaitted, the several govern- 
ments and presidencies in India are hereby required 
to pay the same obedience as if such orders and 
directions had been issued and transmitted by the 
Court of Directors of the said United Company. 

XVII. Provided also, and be it further enacted 
and declared, by the authority aforesaid, that 
nothing in this Act contained shall extend to give 
unto the said Board the power of nominating or 
appointing any of the servants of the said United 
Company ; any thing herein contained to the 
contrary notwithstanding. 

XVIII. And be it further enacted, that as soon 
as the office of any one of the counsellors of the 
presidency of Fort William in Bengal (other than 
the Commander-in-Chief) shall become vacant by 
death, removal, or resignation, the vacancy so 
happening shall not be supplied by the said Court 
of Directors, but the said Supreme Government 
shall from thenceforth consist of a Governor- 
General and three supreme counsellors only ; and 
that the Commander-in-Chief of the Company’s 
forces in India for the time being, shall have voice 
and precedence in Council next after the said 
Governor-General ; any thing in any former Act 
of Parliament contained to the contrary not- 
withstanding. 

XIX. And be it further enacted that the 
Government of the several presidencies and 
settlements of Fort Saint George and Bombay 
shall, after the commencement of this Act, consist 
of a Governor or President, and three Counsellors 
only, of whom the Commander-in-Chief in the said 
several settlements for the time being shall be one, 
having the like precedence in Council as in the 



EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 103 

Presidency of Fort William in Bengal, unless the 
Commander-in-Chief of the Company’s forces in 
India shall happe;n to be present in either of the 
said settlements ; and in such case the said 
Commander-in-Chief shall be one of the said 
Counsellors, instead of the Commander-in-Chief of 
such settlement ; and that the said Commander- 
in-Chief of such settlement shall during such time 
have only a seat, but no voice in the said 
Council. 

XX. And be it further enacted, that the Court 
of Directors of the said United Company shall, 
within the space of one calendar month next after 
the passing of this Act, nominate and appoint, 
from amongst the servants of the said Company in 
India, or any other persons, a fit and proper person 
to be the Governor of the said Presidency or 
Settlement of Fort Saint George, and two other 
fit and proper persons from amongst the said 
servants in India, who, together with the Com- 
mander-in-Chief at Fort Saint George for the time 
being, shall be the Council of the same Presidency 
or Settlement ; and that the said Court of Directors 
shall also, in like manner, and wdthin the time 
aforesaid, nominate and appoint fit and proper 
persons to be the Governor and Council of the said 
Presidency or Settlement of Bombay, under the 
same restrictions as are hereinbefore provided in 
respect to the Governor or President and Council 
of Fort Saint George. 

XXI. And be it further enacted, that in case 
the members present at any of the Boards or 
Councils of Fort William, Fort Saint George, or 
Bombay, shall at any time be equally divided in 
opinion in respect to any matter depending before 



104 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

them, then, and in every such case, the said 
Governor-General or the Governor or President, 
as the case may be, shall have two voices, or the 
casting vote. 

XXII. And be it further enacted, that it shall 
and may be lawful to and for the King’s Majesty, 
his heirs and successors, by any writing or instru- 
ment under his or their sign manual, countersigned 
by the said Secretary of State, or for the Court of 
Directors of the said United Company for the time 
being, by writing under their hands, to remove or 
recall the present or any future Governor-General 
of Fort William at Bengal, or any of the members 
of the Council of Fort William aforesaid, or any of 
the governors or presidents, and members of the 
Councils, of the Presidencies or Settlements of 
Fort Saint George and Bombay, or of any other 
British Settlements in India, or any other person 
or persons holding any office, employment, or 
commission, civil or military, under the said United 
Company in India, for the time being ; and to vacate 
and make void all and every or any appointment or 
appointments of any person or persons to any of 
the offices or places aforesaid ; and that all and 
every the powers and authorities of the respective 
persons so removed or recalled, or whose appoint- 
ment shall be so vacated, shall cease or determine 
at or from such respective time or times as in the 
said writing or writings shall be expressed and 
directed : provided always, that a duplicate or 
copy of every such writing or instrument, under 
His Majesty’s sign manual, attested by the said 
Secretary of State for the time being, shall, within 
eight days after the same shall be signed by His 
Majesty, his heirs or successors, be transmitted or 



EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 105 

delivered, by the said Secretary of State, unto the 
Chairman or Deputy Chairman for the time being 
of the said United Company, to the intent that 
the Court of Directors of the said Company may be 
apprised thereof. 

XXIII. And be it further enacted, that when- 
ever any vacancy or vacancies of the office of 
Governor-Greneral or President, or of any member 
of the Council, shall happen in any of the presi- 
dencies aforesaid, either by death, resignation, or 
recall, as aforesaid, then and in such case the 
Court of Directors of the said United Company 
shall proceed to nominate and appoint a fit person 
or persons to supply such vacancy or vacancies 
from amongst their covenanted servants in India, 
except to the office of Governor-General, or the 
office of *Governor or President of Fort Saint 
George or Bombay, or of any Commander-in- 
Chief, to which several offices the said Court of 
Directors shall be at liberty, if they shall think 
fit, to nominate and appoint any other person or 
persons respectively. 

XXIV. Provided always, and be it further 
enacted, that the said Commanders-in-Chief, at 
each of the said presidencies respectively, shall in 
no case succeed to the office of Governor-General 
or President of Fort William, Fort Saint George, 
or of Bombay, unless thereunto specially appointed 
by the Court of Directors of the said United 
Company ; but that in case of thp vacancy of 
the said offices of Governor-General or President 
respectively, when no person shall be specially ap- 
pointed to succeed thereunto, the Counsellor next 
in rank to such Commander-in-Chief shall succeed 
to such office, and hold the same, until some other 



106 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

person shall be appointed thereunto by the said 
Court of Directors. 

XXV. Provided always, and be it further en- 
acted, that when and so often as the Court of 
Directors shall not, within the space of two calendar 
months, to be computed from the day whereon the 
notification of the vacancy shall have been 
received by the said Court of Directors, proceed to 
supply the same, then and in any such case, and 
so often as the same shall hap})en, it shall be lawful 
for His Majesty, his heirs and successors, to con- 
stitute and appoint, by writing under his or their 
royal sign manual (under the same restrictions and 
regulations as are hereinbefore provided, with 
respect to the nominations and appointments 
made by the said Court of Directors), such person 
or persons as His Majesty, his heirs and successors, 
shall think proper to succeed to and supply the 
respective office or place, offices or places, so vacant 
or from which any person or persons shall be so 
recalled or removed, or whose appointment or 
appointments shall have been vacated and made 
void as aforesaid ; and that every person or persons, 
so constituted and appointed, shall’ have and be 
invested with the same powers, privileges and 
authorities, as if he or they had been nominated 
and appointed by the said Court of Directors, and 
shall be subject to recall only by the King’s 
Majesty, his heirs or successors ; any thing herein 
contained to the contrary notwithstanding. 

XXVI. And be it further enacted, by the 
authority .. aforesaid, that it shall and may be 
lawful to and for the Court of Directors of the said 
United Company, if they shall so think fit, subject 
to the like limitations and restrictions as are 



EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 107 

hereinbefore enacted, respecting the persons quali- 
fied to be appointed members of the Government 
of the respective settlements of the said United 
Company at Fort William, Fort Saint George, and 
Bombay, to appoint, from time, to time, fit and 
proper persons to succeed, in case of vacancy, to 
the several offices of Governor-General or President 
of Fort Saint George or Bombay, or Commander- 
in-Chief of the said Company’s forces at any of the 
said settlements, or member of any of the said 
Councils ; and such appointments respectively at 
their pleasure again to revoke ; but that no person 
so appointed to succeed to any of the said offices, 
in case of vacancy, shall be entitled to any salary, 
advantage, or allowance whatsoever, by reason of 
such appointment, until such persons respectively 
shall take upon themselves the offices to which 
they shall so respectively have been appointed. 

XXVIL And be it further enacted by the 
authority aforesaid that when and so often as the 
number of members of any of the said Councils 
of Fort William, Fort Saint George, or Bombay, 
shall, by death, or absence, by reason of sickness 
or otherwise, for fourteen days be reduced to two, 
including the Governor-General or President of 
such Council, the person who shall stand senior in 
such provisional appointment as is hereinbefore 
mentioned, or in case there shall be no such 
appointment, then the senior civil servant of the 
said Company upon the spot, shall be called to 
such Council, and shall have a voice therein in 
like manner as if he had been appointed thereunto 
by the Court of Directors of the said Company, and 
shall hold such office in case the vacancy shall have 
happened by death, until a successor thereunto 



108 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

shall be appointed by the said Court of Directors ; 
or if such vacancy shall have happened by absence 
or sickness, until the return or recovery of such 
sick or absent member ; and that all persons so 
exercising the office of a Counsellor at any of the 
said presidencies shall be entitled for the time he 
shall so hold the same, to the like advantages, as if 
he had been thereunto permanently appointed by 
the said Court of Directors. 

XXVIII. And be it further enacted, that no resig- 
nation to be made of the offices of the Governor- 
General, or Governor or President of any of the 
subordinate settlements, or Commander-in-Chief, 
or members of the respective Councils of any of 
the said presidencies in India, shall be deemed or 
construed to be legal or valid, or shall be accepted 
as such, unless the same be made by an instru- 
ment in writing under the hand of the officer or 
person resigning the same. 

XXIX. And be it further enacted, that nd 
order or resolution of any General Court of the 
proprietors of the said United Company shall be 
available to revoke or rescind, or in any respect 
to affect, any act, order, resolution, matter, or 
proceeding, of the said Court of Directors, by this 
Act directed or authorized to be made or done 
by the said Court after the same shall have been 
approved by the said Board, in the manner 
hereinbefore directed ; any law or usage to the 
contrary notwithstanding. 

XXX. And be it further enacted, that so much 
and such parts of an Act, made in the twenty-first 
year of the reign of his present Majesty, as directs 
the Court of Directors of the said United Company 
to deliver to the Commissioners of the Treasury, 



EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 109 

or to the High Treasurer for the time being, or to 
one of His Majesty’s principal Secretaries of State, 
copies of any letters or orders relating to the man- 
agement of the revenues, or to the civil and military 
affairs of the said Company ; and also all such 
powers and authorities given to or vested in the 
Proprietors and Directors of the said United 
Company, or in any General or Special Court 
thereof respectively, in and by any Act of Parlia- 
ment or Charter, as are contrary or repugnant to 
this Act, or anything herein contained, shall be, 
and the same are hereby repealed ; anything 
contained in any Act or Charter, or any custom or 
usage to the contrary notwithstanding. 

XXXI. And be it further enacted, that the 
Governor-General and Council of Fort William 
aforesaid shall have power and authority to super- 
intend, control, and direct the several presidencies 
and governments now or hereafter to be erected 
or established in the East Indies by the said United 
Company, in all such points as relate to any trans- 
actions with the coimtry powers, or to war or peace, 
or to the application of the revenues or forces of 
such presidencies and settlements in time of war, 
or any such points as shall, from time to time, be 
specially referred by the Court of Directors of the 
said Company to their superintendence and control. 

XXXII. And, in order to prevent the embarrass- 
ment and difficulty which may arise from any ques- 
tion, whether the orders or instructions of the 
Governor-General and Council of Fort William 
relate to other points than those aforesaid, be 
it further enacted, that notwithstanding any 
doubt which may be entertained by the said 
presidencies or settlements to whom such orders 



110 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

or instructions shall be given, respecting the power 
of the Governor-General and Council to give such 
orders, yet the said presidencies or settlements 
shall be bound to obey such orders and directions 
of the said Governor-General and Council in all 
cases whatever, except only where they shall have 
received positive orders and instructions from the 
said Court of Directors, or from the Secret Com- 
mittee of the said Court of Directors, repugnant to 
the orders and instructions of the said Governor- 
General and Council, and not known to the said 
Governor-General and Council at the time of 
dispatching their orders and instructions as afore- 
said ; and the said Governor-General and Council 
shall at the time of transmitting all such orders 
and instructions, transmit therewith the dates of, 
and the times of receiving, the last dispatches, 
orders, and instructions which they have received 
from the Court of Directors, or from the Secret 
Committee of the said Court of Directors, or any 
of the points contained therein : and the said 
presidencies and governments, in all cases where 
they have received any orders from the said Court 
of Directors, or from the Secret Committee of the 
said Court of Directors, as aforesaid, which they 
shall deem repugnant to the orders of the said 
Governor-General and Council of Fort William, 
and which were not known to the said Governor- 
General and Council at the time of dispatching 
their orders and instructions as aforesaid, shall 
forthwith transmit copies of the same, together 
with an account of all resolutions or orders made by 
them in consequence thereof, to the Governor- 
General and Council of Fort William, who shall, 
after the receipt of the same, dispatch such further 



EAST INDIA COMPANY J^CT, 1784 111 

orders and instructions to the said presidencies 
and settlements as they may judge necessary 
thereupon. 

XXXIII. And be it further enacted, that the 
Governor -General and Council of Fort William 
aforesaid, and the several Presidents and Coun- 
sellors of Fort Saint George and Bombay, shall, 
at their several and respective Boards and Councils, 
proceed, in the first place, to the consideration of 
such questions and business as shall be proposed 
by the said Governor-General or Presidents re- 
spectively ; and when and so often as any matter 
or question shall be propounded at any of the said 
Boards or Councils, by any of the Counsellors 
thereof, it shall be competent to the said Governor- 
General and Presidents respectively, to i)ostpone 
or adjourn the discussion of the matter or question 
so propounded to a future day : provided always, 
that no such adjournment shall exceed forty-eight 
hours, nor shall the matter or question so proposed 
be adjourned more than twice, without the consent 
of the Counsellor who originally proposed the 
scheme. 

XXXIV. And whereas to pursue schemes of 
conquest and extension of dominion in India are 
measures repugnant to the wish, the honour, and 
policy of this nation : be it therefore further 
enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall not 
be lawful for the Governor-General and Council 
of Fort William aforesaid, without the express 
command and authority of the said Court of 
Directors, or of the Secret Committee of the said 
Court of Directors, in any case, except where 
hostilities have actually been commenced, or 
preparations actually made for the commencement 



112 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

of hostilities, against the British nation in India, 
or against some of the Princes or States dependent 
thereon, or whose territories the said United 
Company shall be at such time engaged by any 
subsisting treaty to defend or guarantee, either 
to declare war or commence hostilities, or enter 
into any treaty for making war, against any 
of the Country Princes or States in India, or any 
treaty for guaranteeing the possessidns of any 
Country Princes or States ; and that in such 
case it shall not be lawful for the said Governor- 
General and Council to declare war or commence 
hostilities, or enter into any treaty for making 
war, against any other prince or state than such 
as shall be actually committing hostilities, or 
making preparations as aforesaid, or to make such 
treaty for guaranteeing the possessions of any 
Prince or State, but upon the consideration of 
such Prince or State actually engaging to assist 
the Company against such hostilities commenced, 
preparations made as aforesaid ; and in all cases or 
where hostilities shall be commenced, or treaty 
made, the said Governor-General and Council shall 
by the most expeditious means they can devise, 
communicate the same imto the said Court of 
Directors, together with a full state of the informa- 
tion and intelligence upon which they have 
commenced such hostilities, or made such treaties, 
and their motives and reasons for the, same at 
large. 

XXXV. And be it further enacted, that it shall 
not be lawful for the Governors or Presidents, and 
Counsellors, of Fort Saint George and Bombay, or 
of any other subordinate settlement respectively, 
to make or issue any order for commencing 



EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 113 

hostilities, or levying war, or to negotiate or con- 
clude any treaty of peace, or other treaty, with any 
Indian Prince or State (except in cases of sudden 
emergency or imminent danger, when it shall 
appear dangerous to postpone such hostilities or 
treaty), unless in pursuance of express orders from 
the said Governor-General and Council of Fort 
William aforesaid, or from the said Court of Direc- 
tors, or from the Secret Committee of the said 
Court of Directors ; and every such treaty shall, 
if possible, contain a clause for subjecting the same 
to the ratification or rejection of the Governor- 
General and Council of Fort William aforesaid : 
and the said presidents and counsellors of the said 
Presidencies and Settlements of Fort Saint George 
and Bombay, or other subordinate settlement, are 
hereby required to yield due obedience to all such 
orders as they shall from time to time respectively 
receive from the said Governor-General and Council 
of Fort William aforesaid, concerning the premises. 

XXXVI. And be it further enacted that all and 
singular the said Presidents and Counsellors who 
shall wilfully refuse to pay due obedience to such 
orders and instructions as they shall receive from 
the said Governor-General and Council of Fort 
William as aforesaid, shall be liable to be suspended 
from the exercise of their respective offices or 
powers, by order of the said Governor-General and 
Council of Fort William ; and all and every of 
them are hereby further required, constantly and 
diligently to transmit to the said Governor- 
General and Council of Fort William aforesaid, 
true and exact copies of all orders, resolutions, and 
Acts in Council, of their respective governments, 
presidencies and councils, and also advice and 



114 EAST INDIA COMPANY ACT, 1784 

intelligence of all transactions and matters which 
shall come to their knowledge, material to be 
communicated to the Governor-General and Coun- 
cil of Fort William aforesaid, or which the said 
Governor-General and Council shall from time to 
time require. 

14. Edmund Burke on the Impeachment of 
Warren Hastings, 15-19 February 1788 
My Lords, 

The gentlemen who have it in command to 
support the impeachment against Mr. Hastings, 
late Go^rernor-General of Bengal, have directed 
me to open a general view of the grounds upon 
which the Commons have proceeded in their charge 
against him ; to open a general view of the extent, 
the magnitude, the nature, the tendency, and 
effect of the crimes with which they have charged 
him ; and they have also directed me to give such 
an explanation, as, with their aid, I may be enabled 
to give, of such circumstances, preceding or con- 
comitant with the crimes with which they charge 
him, as may tend to explain whatever may be 
found obscure in the charges as they stand. And 
they have further commanded me, and enabled 
me, I hope and trust, to give to your lordships such 
an explanation of anything in the laws, customs, 
opinions and manners, of the people concerned, 
and who are the objects of the crimes with which 
they charge him, as may tend to remove all doubt 
and ambiguity from the minds of your lordships 
upon these subjects. Tke several articles as they 
appear before you, will be opened by the other 
gentlemen with more distinctness, and without 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 115 


doubt with infinitely more particularity, when 
they come to apply the evidence that they adduce 
to each charge. This is the plan, my lords, that 
we mean to pursue on the great charge which is 
now before your lordships. 

My lords, I confess that in this business I come 
before your lordships with a considerable degree 
of animation, because I think it is a most auspicious 
circumstance in a prosecution like this, in which 
the honour of this kingdom and that of many 
nations is involved, that from the commencement 
of our preliminary process to the hour of this solemn 
trial, not the smallest difference of opinion has 
arisen between the two houses. My lords, there 
were persons who, looking rather upon what was 
to be found in the journals of parliament than 
what was to be expected from the public justice 
of parliament, had formed hopes consolatory 
to them and unfavourable to us. There were 
persons who entertained hopes that the corrup- 
tions of India should have escaped amongst the 
dissensions of parliament : but they are disap- 
pointed. They will be disappointed in all the rest 
of their expectations which they had formed upon 
everything except the merits of the cause. The 
Commons will not have the melancholy and 
unsocial glory of having acted a right part in an 
imperfect work. What the greatest inquest of the 
nation has begun, its highest tribunal will accom- 
plish. Justice will be done to India. It is true 
your lordships will have your full share in this great 
and glorious work ; but we shall always consider 
that any honour that is divided with your lordships 
will be more than doubled to ourselves. 

My lords, I must confess that, amongst all these 



116 


EDMUND BURKE 


encouraging prospects, the Commons do not 
approach your lordships’ bar without some 
considerable degree of anxiety. I hope and trust 
that the magnitude of the interests which we have 
in hand will reconcile some degree of solicitude 
for the event with the undoubting confidence with 
which we repose ourselves upon your lordships’ 
justice. For we are so made, my lords, that it is 
not only the greatness of the danger but the value 
of the stake that excites our concern in every 
undertaking ; and I do assure your lordships — 
for I am authorized to say it — that no standard is 
sufficient to estimate the value which the Commons 
set upon the fate of the case which they now bring 
before you. For, my lords, it cannot be conceived — 
God forbid that it should be conceived — that the 
business of this day is the business of this man. 
The question is, not solely whether the prisoner at 
the bar be found innocent or be found guilty, but 
whether millions of mankind shall be miserable or 
happy. You do not decide the case only ; you fix 
a rule. For your lordships will undoubtedly see, 
in the course of this cause, that there is not only 
a long, connected, systematic, course of misdemean- 
ours, but an equally connected system of maxims 
and principles invented to justify them, upon 
which your lordships must judge. It is according 
to the judgement that you shall pronoimce upon 
the past transactions of India, connected with 
those principles, that the whole rule, tenure, 
tendency and character, of our future government 
in India is to be finally decided. My lords, it will 
take its course and work its whole impression from 
the business of this hour. My lords, it is not only 
the interest of a great empire which is concerned, 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 117 


which is now a most considerable part of the 
British Empire, but, my lords, the credit and 
honour of the British nation will themselves be 
decided by this decision. My lords, they will stand 
or fall thereby. We are to decide by the case of 
this gentlemen whether the crimes of individuals 
are to be turned into public guilt and national 
ignominy, or whether this nation will convert 
these offences, which have thrown a transient 
shade on its glory, into a judgement that will 
reflect a permanent lustre on the honour, justice 
and humanity, of this kingdom. . . . 

My lords, in the next place I observe, with 
respect to the crime which we chose, we chose one 
which we contemplated in its nature, with all its 
circumstances, with all its extenuations, and with 
all its aggravations ; and, on that review, we are 
bold to say that the crimes with which we charge 
the prisoner at the bar are substantial crimes ; 
that they are no errors or mistakes, such as wise 
and good men might possibly fall into. They are 
crimes, my lords — truly, and properly, and em- 
phatically, crimes. The Commons are too liberal 
not to allow for the difficulties of a great and 
arduous public situation. They know too well 
that domineering necessities will frequently occur 
in all great affairs. They know that the exigencies 
of a great occasion, in its precipitate career, do 
not give time to have recourse to fixed principles, 
but that they oblige men frequently to decide in 
a manner that calmer reason would certainly have 
rejected. We know that, as we are to be served 
by men, the persons who serve us must be tried as 
men, and that there is a very large allowance 
indeed due to human infirmity and human error. 



118 


EDMUND BURKE 


This, my lords, we knew and had weighed before 
we came to your lordships’ bar. But the crimes 
which we charge in these articles are not the lapses 
and defects and errors of common human nature 
and frailty, such as we know and feel, and can 
allow for. They are crimes which have their rise 
in the wicked dispositions of men ; they are crimes 
that have their rise in avarice, rapacity, pride, 
cruelty, ferocity, malignity of temper, haughtiness, 
insolence ; in short, my lords, in everything that 
manifests a heart blackened to the very blackest — 
a heart dyed deep in blackness — a heart corrupted, 
vitiated and gangrened, to the very core. If we 
do not plant the crimes that we charge [him with 
in] those vices which the breast of man is made to 
abhor and its laws to protect against, we desire no 
longer to be heard on this occasion. Let every- 
thing be pleaded that can be pleaded on the score 
of error and infirmity ; we give up the whole. We 
stand on crimes that were crimes of deliberation. 
We charge him with nothing that he did not 
commit upon deliberation, that he did not com- 
mit against remonstrance. We charge him with 
nothing that he did not commit against command. 
We charge him with nothing that he did not 
commit contrary to the advice, contrary to the 
admonition and reprimand, of those who were 
authorized by the laws to reprove and reprimand 
him. They were crimes, not against forms, but 
against those eternal laws of justice which you are 
assembled here to assert ; which forms are made 
to support and not to supersede in any instance 
whatever. They were, not in formal and technical 
language, but in real and absolute effect, high 
crimes and misdemeanours. 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 119 


So far as to the crimes. Now as to the criminal. 
We have not chosen to bring before you a poor, 
puny, trembling delinquent, misled perhaps by the 
example of those who ought to have kept him in 
awe, and afterwards oppressed by their power, in 
order to make his punishment the means of screen- 
ing the greater offences of those that were above 
him. We have not brought before your lordships 
one of those poor, obscure offenders, in an inferior 
situation, who, when his insignificance and weak- 
ness are weighed against the power of the prosecu- 
tion, gives even to public justice something of the 
appearance of oppression. No, my lords ; we 
have brought before your lordships the first man 
in rank, authority and station. We have brought 
before you the head, the chief, the captain-general 
in iniquity — one in whom all the frauds, all the 
peculations, all the violence, all the tyranny, in 
India are embodied, disciplined and arrayed. This 
is the person, my lords, that we bring before you. 
Then, if we have brought before you such a person, 
if you strike at him, you. will not have need of a 
great many more examples ; you strike at the 
whole corps if you strike at the head. . . . 

I am now, my lords, to proceed to open the 
charge. I hope and trust that your lordships will 
be so good as to suppose that the business which 
falls to my share, which is rather explanation of 
the circumstances than enforcement of the crimes, 
is not a thing that occurs every day in the ordinary 
round of municipal affairs ; that it has relation to 
many things, that it touches many points in many 
places, which are wholly removed from the ordinary 
beaten orbit of our English business. In other 
affairs every allusion immediately meets its point 



120 


EDMUND BURKE 


of reference ; nothing can be started that does not 
immediately waken your attention to something 
of your own laws which you meet with every day 
in the ordinary transactions of life : but here you 
are caught as it were into another world ; here you 
are to have the way pioneered before you. Your 
lordships will see the absolute necessity there is of 
having an explanation of every part of it. As it is 
new, the business must be explained ; as it is 
intricate as well as new, that explanation can be 
but comparatively short : and therefore, knowing 
you to be possessed, along with ail other judicial 
virtues, of the first and foundation of them all, 
judicial patience, I hope and trust that your lord- 
ships will not grudge a few hours to the explanation 
of that which has cost the Commons fourteen 
years’ assiduous application to acquire — ^that your 
lordships will not disdain a few hours to what has 
cost the people of India upwards of thirty years of 
their innate, inveterate, hereditary patience to 
endure. 

My lords, the powers which Mr. Hastings is 
charged with having abused are the powers 
delegated to him by the East India Company. 
The East India Company itself acts under two 
sorts of powers, derived from two sources. The 
first source of its power is under a charter which 
the Crown was authorized by act of parliament to 
grant. The next is from several grants and charters 
indeed, as well as that great fundamental charter 
which it derived from the Emperor of the Moguls, 
the person with whose dominions they are chiefly 
conversant ; particularly the great charter by 
which they acquired the high stewardship of the 
kingdoms of Bengal, Behar, and Orissa, in 1765. 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 121 

Under those two charters they act. As to the 
first, it is from that charter that they derive the 
capacity by which they can be considered as a 
public body at all, or capable of any public func- 
tion ; it is from thence they acquire the capacity 
to take any other charter, to acquire any other 
offices, or to hold any other possessions. This 
being the root and origin of their power, it makes 
them responsible to the party from whom that 
power is derived. As they have emanated from 
the supreme power of this kingdom, they them- 
selves are responsible — ^their body as a corporate 
body, themselves as individuals — and the whole 
body and train of their servants are responsible, 
to the high justice of this kingdom. In delegating 
great power to the India Company, this kingdom 
has not released jts sovereignty. On the contrary, 
its responsibility is increased by the greatness and 
sacredness of the power given. For this power 
they are and must be responsible ; and I hope this 
day your lordships will show that this nation never 
did give a power without imposing a proportion- 
able degree of responsibility. 

As to the other power, which they derived from 
the Mogul empire by various charters from that 
crown, and particularly by the charter of 1765, by 
which they obtained the office of lord high steward, 
as I said, or diwan, of the kingdoms of Bengal, 
Behar, and Orissa, by that charter they bound 
themselves, and bound exclusively all their ser- 
vants, to perform all the duties belonging to that 
new office. And by the ties belonging to that new 
relation they were bound to observe the laws, rights, 
usages and customs, of the natives, and to pursue 
their benefit in all things ; which was the nature, 



122 EDMUND BUEKE 

institution, and purpose, of the office which they 
received. If the power of the sovereign from 
whom they derived these pov^ers should be by any 
misfortune in human afEairs annihilated or sus- 
pended, the duty of the people below, which they 
acquired under his charter, is not suspended, is not 
anniliilated, but remains in all its force ; and, for 
the responsibility, they are thrown back upon that 
country from whence their original power, and 
along with it their responsibility, both emanated 
in one and the same act. For when the Company 
acquired that office in India, an English corporation 
became an integral part of the Mogul empire. 
When Great Britain assented to that grant virtu- 
ally, and afterwards took advantage of it. Great 
Britain made a virtual act of union with that 
country, by which they bound themselves as 
securities for their subjects, to preserve the people 
in all rights, laws and liberties, which their natural 
original sovereign was bound to enforce, if he had 
been in a condition to enforce it. So that the two 
duties flowing from two different sources are now 
united in one, and come to have justice called for 
them at the bar of this House, before the supreme 
royal justice of this kingdom, from whence origin- 
ally their powers were derived. 

It may be a little necessary, when we are stating 
the powers they have derived from their charter, 
and which we state Mr. Hastings to have abused, 
to state, in as short and as comprehensive words 
as I can (for the matter is large indeed) what the 
constitution of the Company is, and particularly 
what its constitution is in reference to its Indian 
service ; where the great theatre of the abuse was 
situated, and where those abuses were committed. 



IMPEACHMENT OF WAEREN HASTINGS 123 

Your lordships will recollect that the East lAdia 
Company — and therefore I shall spare you a long 
history of that, hoping and trusting that your 
lordships will think it is not to inform you, but to 
revive circumstances in your memory, that I enter 
into this detail — ^the East India Company had its 
origin about the latter end of the reign of Elizabeth, 
a period when all sorts of companies, inventions, 
and monopolies, were in fashion. And at that 
time the Company was sent out with large, exten- 
sive powers for increasing the commerce and the 
honour of this country : for to increase its com- 
merce without increasing its honour and reputation 
would have been thought at that time, and will 
be thought now, a bad bargain for the country. 
But their powers were under that charter confined 
merely to commercial affairs. By degrees, as the 
theatre of the operation was distant, as its inter- 
course was with many great, some barbarous, 
and all of them armed nations, where not only the 
sovereign but the subjects were also armed in all 
places, it was found necessary to enlarge their 
powers. The first power they obtained was a 
power of naval discipline in their ships — a power 
which has been since dropped. The next was a 
power of law martial. The next was a power of 
civil, and to a degree of criminal, jurisdiction 
within their own factory, within their own settle- 
ments, over their own people and their own ser- 
vants. The next was — and there was a stretch 
indeed — the power of peace and war ; those great, 
high prerogatives of sovereignty which never were 
known before to be parted with to any subjects. 
But^ those high sovereign powers were given to 
the East India Company. So that when it had 



124 


EDMUND BURKE 


acquired them all, which it did about the end of 
the reign of Charles the Second, the East India 
Company did not seem to be merely a company 
formed for the extension of the British commerce, 
but in reality a delegation of the whole power and 
sovereignty of this kingdom sent into the East. 
In that light the Company began undoubtedly to 
be considered, and ought to be considered, as a 
subordinate sovereign power ; that is, sovereign 
with regard to the objects which it touched, 
subordinate with regard to the power from whence 
this great trust was derived. 

When the East India Company once appeared 
in that light, things happened to it totally different 
from what has happened in all other ordinary 
affairs, and from what has happened in all the 
remote mysteries of politicians, or been dreamed 
of in the world. For, in all other countries, a 
political body that acts as a commonwealth is 
first settled, and trade follows as a necessary 
consequence of the protection obtained by political 
power. But here the affair was reversed : the 
constitution of the Company began in commerce 
and ended in empire ; and where powers of peace 
and war are given, it wants but time and circum- 
stance to make this supersede every other, and 
the affairs of commerce fall into their proper rank 
and situation. And accordingly it did happen that, 
the possession and power of assertion of these great 
authorities coinciding with the improved state of 
Europe, with the improved state of arts and the 
improved state of laws, and (what is much more 
material) the improved state of military discip- 
line ; that coinciding with the general fall of Asia, 
with the relaxation and dissolution of its govern- 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 125 

ment, with the fall of its warlike spirit, and the 
total disuse almost of all parts of military discip- 
line ; those coinciding, the India Company became 
what it is, a great empire carrying on subordinately 
under the public authority a great commerce ; it 
became that thing which was supposed by the 
Koman law so unsuitable — ^the same power was 
a trader, the same power was a lord. 

In this situation, the India Company, however, 
still preserved traces of its original mercantile 
character, and the whole exterior order of its 
service is still carried on upon a mercantile plan 
and mercantile principles : in fact, it is a state in 
the disguise of a merchant, a great public office in 
the disguise of a counting-house. Accordingly the 
whole order and series, as I observed, is commer- 
cial : while the principal, inward, real part of the 
Company is entirely political. Accordingly the 
Company’s service — of which the order and dis- 
cipline is necessary to be explained to your lord- 
ships, that you may see in what manner the abuses 
have affected it — is commercial. 

In the first place, all the persons who go abroad 
in the Company’s service enter as clerks in the 
counting-house, and are called by a name to 
correspond to it — writers. In that condition they 
are obliged to serve five years. The next step is 
that of a factor, in which they are obliged to serve 
three years. The next step they take is that of a 
junior merchant, in which they are obliged to serve 
three years more. Then they become a senior 
merchant, which is the highest stage of advance 
in the Company’s service, as a rank by which they 
had pretensions, before the year 1774, to the 
Council, to the succession of the Presidency, and 



126 


EDMUND BURKE 


to whatever other honours the Company has to 
bestow. Therefore the Company followed this idea 
in the particulars of their service ; having origin- 
ally established factories in certain places, which 
factories by degrees grew to the name of Presi- 
dencies and Councils, in proportion as the power 
and influence of the Company increased, and as the 
political began to dominate over the mercantile. 
And so it continued till the year 1773, when the 
legislature broke in, for proper reasons urging 
them to it, upon that order of the service, and 
appointed to the superior part persons who were 
not entitled to it — however some might have been, 
— by the course and order of service, such as Mr. 
Hastings was. But, whatever title they had from 
thence, their legal title was derived from an 
express act of parliament, nominating them to 
that Presidency. In all other respects, the whole 
course of the service denominated by act of parlia- 
ment does remain upon that footing — that is, a 
commercial footing. 

Your lordships see here a regular system, a 
regular order, a regular course of gradation, which 
requires eleven years before persons can arrive at 
the highest trusts and situations in the Company’s 
service. You will therefore be utterly astonished 
when you know that, after so long a service and 
so long a probation was required, things very 
difierent have happened, and that in a much shorter 
time persons have been seen returning to this king- 
dom with great and affluent fortunes. It will be 
necessary for you to consider, and it will be a great 
part of your inquiry, when we come before you to 
substantiate evidence against Mr. Hastings, to 
know how that order came to be broken down 



IMPEACHMENT OP WARREN HASTINGS 127 

completely, so that scarce a trade of it for any 
good purpose remains. For, though I will not deny 
that any order in a state may be superseded by the 
Presidency, when any great parts and talents 
upon superior exigencies are called forth, yet I 
must say the order of that service was formed upon 
wise principles. It gave the persons who were 
put in that course of probation an opportunity, if 
circumstances enabled them, of acquiring ex- 
perience ; it gave those who watched them a 
constant inspection upon them in all their progress ; 
it gave them the necessity of acquiring a character 
in proportion to their standing, that all they had 
gained by years should not be lost by misconduct. 
It was a great, substantial regulation fit to be 
observed ; but scarcely a trace of it remains to be 
discovered. For Mr. Hastings first broke through 
that service by making offices which had no 
reference to gradation, but which were superior 
in profit to those which the highest gradation 
might have acquired. He established whole 
systems of offices, and especially the systems of 
offices established in 1781, which being new none 
of the rules of gradation applied to them, and he 
filled them in such a manner as suited best his own 
views and purposes ; so that in effect the whole 
of that order, whatever merit was in it, was by him 
broken down and subverted. The consequence 
was that persons in the most immature stages of 
life have been put to conduct affairs which re- 
quired the greatest maturity of judgement and 
the greatest possible temper and moderation ; and 
effects consequent have followed upon it. So far 
with respect to that order of the Company’s 
service. 



126 


EDMUND BURKE 


My lords, I must remark, before I go farther, 
that there is something peculiar in the service of 
the East India Company, and different from that 
of any other nation that has ever transferred its 
power from one country to another. The East 
India Company in India is not the British nation. 
When the Tartars entered into China and into 
Hindustan — ^when all the Goths and Vandals 
entered into Europe — ^when the Normans came 
into England — ^they came as a nation. The Com- 
pany in India does not exist as a nation. Nobody 
can go there that does not go in its service. There- 
fore the English nation in India is nothing but a 
seminary for the succession of officers. They 
are a nation of place-men. They are a republic, 
a commonwealth, without a people. They are 
a state made up wholly of magistrates. The con- 
sequence of which is, that there is no people to 
control, to watch, to balance against the power of 
office. The power of office, so far as the English 
nation is concerned, is the sole power in the 
country. There is no corrective upon it what- 
ever. The consequence of which is, that, being 
a kingdom of magistrates, the esjprit de corps is 
strong in it — the spirit of the body by which 
they consider themselves as having a common 
interest, and a common interest, separated both 
from the country that sent them out and from 
the country in which they are, and where there is 
no control by persons who understand their 
language, who understand their manners, or can 
apply their conduct to the laws of the country. 
Such control does not exist in India. Therefore 
confederacy is easy, and has been general among 
them ; and therefore your lordships are not to 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 129 


expect that that should happen in such a body 
which never happened in the world in any body 
or corporation, namely, that they should ever be 
a proper check and control upon themselves : it is 
not in the nature of things. There is a monopoly 
with an esprit de corps at home, called the India 
Company, and there is an esprit de corps abroad ; 
and both those systems are united into one body, 
animated with the same spirit, that is, with the cor- 
porate spirit, which never was a spirit which cor- 
rected itself in any time or circumstance in the world , 
and which is such a thing as has not happened 
to the Moors, to the Portuguese, to the Romans 
— to go to any old or new examples. It has not 
happened in any one time or circumstance in the 
world, except in this. And out of that has issued a 
series of abuses, at the head of which Mr. Hastings 
has put himself, against the authority of the East 
India Company at home and every authority in 
this country. 

My lords, the next circumstance is — and which 
is curious too — ^that the emoluments of office do 
not in any degree correspond with the trust. For, 
under the name of junior merchant, and senior 
merchant, and writer, and those other little names 
of a counting-house, you have great magistrates ; 
you have the administrators of revenues truly 
royal ; you have judges civil, and in a great degree 
criminal, who pass judgements upon the greatest 
properties of the country. You have all thes6 
under these names ; and the emoluments that 
belong to them are so weak, so inadequate to the 
dignity of the character, that it is impossible — I 
may say of that service that it is absolutely 
impossible — for the subordinate parts of' it -td 



130 


EDMUND BURKE 


exist, to hope to exist, as Englishmen who look 
at their home as their ultimate resource — to exist 
in a state of incorruption. In that service the rule 
that prevails in many other countries is reversed. 
In other countries, often the greatest situations 
are attended with but little emoluments ; because 
glory, fame, reputation, the love, the tears of joy, 
the honest applause of their country, pay those 
great and weighty labours which in great situa- 
tions are sometimes required from the common- 
wealth ; but all other countries pay in money 
what cannot be paid in fame and reputation. 
But it is the reverse with the India Company. 
All the subordinate parts of the gradation are 
officers, who, notwithstanding the weight and 
importance of the offices and dignities entrusted 
to them, are miserably provided for ; and the 
heads, the chiefs, have great emoluments, securing 
them against every mode of temptation. And 
this is the thing Mr. Hastings has abused. He 
was at the head of the service. He has corrupted 
his hands and sullied his government with bribes. 
He has used oppression and tyranny in the place 
of legal government ; and, instead of endeavour- 
ing to find honest, honourable, and adequate 
rewards for the persons who served the public, 
he has left them to prey upon it without the 
smallest degree of control. He has neither 
supplied nor taken care to supply, with that 
unbounded licence which he used over the public 
revenues, an honest scale of emoluments, suited 
to the vastness of the power given to the Com- 
pany’s service. He has not employed the public 
revenue for that purpose ; but has left them at 
large to prey upon the country, and find them* 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 131 

selves emoluments as they could. These are the 
defects of that service. There is no honest emolu- 
ment, in much the greater part of it, correspondent 
to the nature and answerable to the expectations 
of the people who serve. There is an unbounded 
licence in almost all other respects ; and, as one 
of the honestest and ablest servants of the 
Company said to me, it resembled the service 
of the Mahrattas — little pay, but unbounded 
licence to plunder. This is the pay of the Com- 
pany’s service ; a service opened to all dishonest 
emolument, shut up to all things that are honest 
and fair. I do not say that the salaries would 
not sound well here ; but when you consider the 
nature of the trusts, the dignity of the situation 
whatever the name of it is, the powers that are 
granted, and the hopes that every man has of 
establishing himself at home, it is a source of 
infinite grievance, of infinite abuse ; and we charge 
Mr. Hastings, instead of stopping up, instead of 
endeavouring to regulate, instead of endeavouring 
to correct, so grievous and enormous an error, 
with having increased every part of it. 

My lords, the next circumstance which dis- 
tinguishes the East India Company is the youth 
of the persons who are employed in the system 
of that service. They have almost universally 
been sent out at that period of life, to begin their 
progress and career in active life and in the use 
of power, which in all other places has been 
employed in the course of a rigid education. 
They have been sent there in fact — ^to put it in 
a few words — with a perilous independence, with 
too inordinate expectations, and with boundless 
power. They are schoolboys without tutors ; 



132 


EDMUND BURKE 


they are minors without guardians. The world 
is let loose upon them with all its temptations ; 
and they are let loose upon the world, with all the 
powers that despotism can give. This is the 
situation of the Company’s servants. 

There is one thing that is remarkable. They 
are to exercise what your lordships are now 
exercising — high judicial powers — without the 
smallest study of any law, either general or 
municipal. It is made a rule in the service, a rule 
confirmed even by the attempts that were made 
to regulate it — I mean confirmed by Sir Elijah 
Impey, when he undertook to be legislator for 
India — that the judicial character, which is the 
last in study and the last in professional experi- 
ence, that to which all professional men ultimately 
look up, is the first experimental situation of a 
Company’s servant ; and it is expressly said that 
the office and situation of a judge are to be filled 
by the junior servants of the Company. And, as 
the emolument is not equal to that of other 
situations, the judicial service is to be taken as 
in transitu — as a passage to other things ; and, 
as soon as a man has supplied the defects of his 
education by the advantage of experience, he is 
immediately translated to another situation, and 
another young man is sent there to learn, at the 
expense of the properties of India, to fill a situation 
which he is not to fill. 

So with regard to the other situations. They 
are the situations of great statesmen, which 
undoubtedly, according to the practice of the 
world, require rather a large converse with men, 
to fill properly, and much intercourse in life, than 
the study of books — though that has its eminent 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 133 


service. We know too that, in the habits of 
civilized life, in cultivated society, there is 
imbibed by men a good deal of the solid practice 
of government, of the true maxims of state, and 
everything that enables a man to serve his country. 
But these men are sent over to exercise functions 
at which a statesman here would tremble, without 
any study, without any of that sort of experience 
which forms men gradually and insensibly to 
great afEairs. These men are sent over to India 
without maturity, without experience, without 
knowledge or habits in cultivated life, to perform 
such functions as I will venture to say the greatest 
statesmen are hardly equal to. 

Mr. Hastings has himself, in his defence before 
the House of Commons, and in the defences he has 
made before your lordships, lamented his own 
situation in this particular. It was much to be 
lamented indeed. How far it will form a justi- 
fication for his conduct, when we come to examine 
that conduct, will be seen ; how far it will furnish 
either extenuation or palliation will likewise be 
seen. But so is the fact, and so we must lament 
it, that the servants of the Company are sent out 
young, are sent out with incompetent emoluments, 
are sent out to a body that forms them into an 
esprit de corps ; sent out in that situation without 
any control upon them, without that which is the 
best thing in education, discipline, restraint, order 
and subordination, which are education, and all 
the rest of it are but subordinate to this great 
point. 

My lords, by means of this bad system of things 
it has so happened, and does happen, that the 
very laws we have made, the covenants the 



134 


EDMUND BURKE 


Company has got its servants to enter into, and 
the orders that have been given, have proved as 
things have turned out moat noxious and mis- 
chievous to the country, instead of beneficial. 
For the servants of the Company are obliged, 
when they enter into the service, to enter into it 
not only with the general duty which attaches 
upon all servants, but they enter into a specific 
covenant with their masters, to perform all the 
duties described in that covenant, under heavy 
penalties. They are bound by them ; and at 
every step of their progress, from writer to factor, 
from factor to junior merchant, and from junior 
merchant to senior merchant, they are bound to 
renew these covenants by something — I speak 
without offence — which may be said to resemble 
confirmation in the church. They are obliged to 
renew their obligation. This covenant would have 
been wise and proper if it had been enforced. 
The orders of the Company have forbidden them 
to take any unlawful emoluments. The act of 
parliament has fulminated against them. What 
is the consequence ? The consequence is that, 
there being clear, positive laws, clear, positive 
covenants, and positive engagements having no 
exception of circumstances in them or difference 
quoad maius et minus, but every one who offends 
against the law being liable to the law, he who 
has taken but one penny of unlawful emolument — 
and all have taken many pennies of unlawful 
emolument — dare not complain of the most 
abandoned extortion and cruel oppression ; and 
he who has taken a penny to do a good act is 
obliged to be silent when he sees whole nations 
desolated about him. The great criminal has 



IMPEACHMENT OP WARREN HASTINGS 135 


the laws in his hand ; he is always able to prove 
the small offence and crush the person entirely 
who has committed it. In consequence of which, 
Mr. Hastings has not only obtained a vast power 
by this grand defect in the Company’s service, 
but by distributing liberally the emoluments of 
the Company, and by making it impossible for 
any man to rise but through his favour, he has 
such a hold of corruption that he has linked it, 
got it bound above, below, and on all sides about 
him, by one common participation and connivance. 
And accordingly he has had no complaint from 
the service against him. He states it as one of 
his merits that there has been no such com- 
plaint. No such complaint can exist. The esfrit 
de corps forbids it, in which an informer is the 
most odious and detestable of all characters, and 
is hunted down, and has always been hunted 
down, as a common enemy of the common profit. 
He cannot do it ; because as nobody is free from 
small offences, the great offender can always 
crush the small one. And accordingly, what is 
singular, if you examine the correspondence of 
Mr. Hastings, you would imagine, from many 
expressions very deliberately used by him, that 
the Company’s service was made out of the very 
filth and dregs of mankind, the most degenerate 
public body that ever existed in the world ; but, 
if you can examine his conduct towards them, 
you would imagine he had lived in the speculative 
schemes of visionary perfection. He was fourteen 
years at the head of that service, and there is not 
one single instance in which he endeavoured to 
detect corruption, in which he ever attempted to 
punish it ; but the whole service with that whole 



136 


EDMUND BURKE 


mass of enormity slept, as it were, at once under 
his terror and his protection — his protection if 
they did not dare to move against him, his terror 
from his power to pluck out individuals and make 
a public example of them whenever he pleased. 

And therefore the first thing to be observed is, 
that it is a service of confederacy, a service of 
connivance, a service of various systems of guilt, 
of which Mr. Hastings was the head, protector, 
and conniver. Not only as protector and conniver, 
but we shall prove to your lordships that, when 
the Company were driven by shame — not by 
inclination, but by shame — to order several 
prosecutions against the delinquents, Mr. Hast- 
ings, not satisfied with the general connivance, 
directly contrary to the duty of his office, and 
directly contrary to the express and positive law 
of the Court of Directors, which law parliament 
had bound upon him as his duty — not satisfied 
with that connivance, before he went away passed 
a general pardon, which he was not authorized to 
give, and at once ordered the whole body of the 
prosecutions of the Company to be discharged. 
Then, having had fourteen years’ connivance, and 
then a general release of all charges and actions 
of the Company being given by usurpation, fraud, 
and madness in him, he now puts himself at the 
head, and expects the support of that body which 
he fully discharged from all prosecutions. You 
will find in the course of this business that, 
whenever, by means that have been fortunately 
used but unfortunately stopped, these charges 
have been brought against him of any bribery, 
corruption or malversation, his point has been 
never to answer one word to that bribery, corrup- 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 137 


tion, malversation, but to inquire of the whole 
service whether there was any one man in it that 
would give him an ill word. He is just in that 
situation in which he may well call witnesses to his 
character ; but he will find himself utterly in- 
capable of justifying his conduct. So far with 
regard to that part of the service. 

My lords, there is another part of the service 
which I really omitted, but whether I should put 
it first or last I must confess I am at some loss to 
decide ; because, though it appears to be the 
lowest part of the service, it is by far the most 
considerable and the moat efficient ; without a 
full consideration and explanation of which, no 
part hardly of the conduct of Mr. Hastings, and 
of many others that may be in his situation, can 
be well understood. I have given you an account 
of writers, factors, merchants, who exercise the 
offices of judges, chancellors, ministers of state, 
and chancellors of the exchequer, and managers 
of great revenues. I have given you some de- 
scription of them. But there is another description 
of men, whether in the Company's service or not, 
that is of more importance than them all ; that 
is, a description of character you have often read 
of, but which has not been sufficiently explained — 
I mean the character of a banya. When the 
Company’s service was nothing but mercantile, 
and they were utterly unacquainted with the 
country, they used the intervention of certain 
factors among the natives, who were called banyas. 
We called them so. They were of the tribe or 
caste of the vaisyas or merchants, the Indians 
being distributed into tribes ; and the English 
employed them as their factors in their dealing 



138 


EDMUND BURKE 


in the country ; and the name still continues 
when the functions of the banyas have become 
totally different. A banya has other names too. 
He is called diwan or steward : and indeed that 
is a term with more propriety applied to him in 
several of the functions which he occupies. He is 
by his office the steward of the household of every 
European gentleman, and has the care, manage- 
ment, and ordering, of his servants. He is a 
domestic servant. He is generally chosen out of 
that class of natives who, by being habituated to 
misery and subjection, can submit to any orders, 
and are fit for any of the basest services. Having 
been themselves subject to oppression, they are 
fitted perfectly — for that is the true education — 
to oppress others. They serve an apprenticeship 
of servitude to qualify them for the trade of 
tyranny. They are persons without whom a 
European can do nothing. They know, they 
themselves being trained in that way, all the ways, 
all the little frauds, all the defensive armour, all 
the artifices and contrivances, by which abject 
slavery secures itself against the violence of 
power. They know all the lurking-holes, all the 
winding recesses, of the unfortunate ; and they 
hunt out distress and misery even to their last 
retreats. They know the way they have suffered 
themselves, and far from being taught by these 
sufferings to abstain, they have only learned the 
way of afflicting others. Without them, Euro- 
peans, with all their pompous names, with all 
their consideration, are nothing. The moment 
a Company’s servant comes there — and they have 
the best intelligence of what is done at home — 
that class of people immediately make application 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 139 


to the gentleman who comes to India. They take 
possession of him, as if he were their inheritance. 
They have knowledge of the country ; they have 
money ; and they have the arts of making money. 
The gentleman who comes from home has none 
of them ; he has nothing but simplicity ; he has 
nothing but a desire of wealth, great indigence, 
and a disposition to relieve himself. These banyas 
have all ; they have money, and a knowledge of 
the country ; and they know the means of ac- 
quiring wealth. Accordingly they take possession 
of him ; and it is much to be lamented that they 
do continue a tyranny not only over the people 
but over the master, who does nothing but give 
them the ticket of his name. So that the man is 
connected and supported by a European who is 
well supported at home, and from that moment 
forward it is not the Englishman, but it is the 
black banya, that is the master. He keeps the 
Englishman alive. 

We know how young men are sent out of this 
country. We know how happy we are soon to 
know that they are no longer a burden to their 
friends and parents, but are in a situation of 
thriving. The banya knows it too. He supplies 
him with money. But the chief way in which he 
is paid is the use of his master’s name and power ; 
and thus he goes into the country with a com- 
mission in his hand which nothing can resist. This 
banya thus empowered has not only the people 
under his subjection, but his master also. The 
way he has him under his subjection is this — ^he 
has that dreadful power over him which every 
creditor has over his debtor. The master is no 
longer a master ; he is the tool in the hands of 



140 


EDMUND BURKE 


this man. Actions the most abhorrent to his 
nature he must see done before his face — and 
thousands and thousands worse are done in his 
absence — and he dare* not complain of them. The 
banya extorts, robs, murders, and gives him what 
proportion of [the spoil] he pleases. If he should 
murmur at him, the very power that was sent 
over to protect the people of India from these 
very abuses — the best things being perverted 
when put into situations not fit for them — the 
very laws of England, which make the recovery 
of debts more easy, give ten thousand times more 
power to the banya over his master ; and the 
court [of justice] becomes a collateral security for 
that abominable tyranny, executed over Euro- 
peans as well as natives. So that, while we are 
here boasting of British poVer, we are, in more 
than half the service, nothing but the inferior 
tools and miserable instruments of the tyranny 
which the lower part of the natives exercise, to 
the disgrace of the British power and to the ruin 
of all that is respectable among their own country- 
men. They have subverted the first houses ; 
totally ruined and undone the country ; cheated 
and defrauded the revenue ; and kept people in 
India under a miserable state of beggary ; until 
something or other has relieved them from this 
servitude. Which is the true reason that the 
Company’s servants in India, in order to free 
themselves from this horrid and atrocious servi- 
tude, are obliged to become the tools of men in 
power to get some office that may enable them to 
make money to pay their debts, or to be the tools 
of Mr. Hastings. It is true that these people were 
originally the lowest castes in the country ; but, 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 141 

after seeing the profit which these men make, and 
that there is neither power, profession, nor 
occupation to be had that a reputable person 
could have, men born to better things, men of 
higher castes, have thrown themselves into that 
disgraceful servitude, have become menial ser- 
vants to Englishmen, that they might rise by 
their degradation. But they have prostituted 
their integrity ; they have equally lost their 
character ; and there is no difference between 
the best and the worst. . . . 

Now your lordships see the whole of the 
revolutions. I have stated them, I trust, with 
perspicuity ; stated the grounds and principles 
upon which they were made ; stated the abuses 
that grew upon them, and that every revolution 
produced its abuse. You saw the native govern- 
ment vanish away by degrees, until it is reduced 
to a situation fit for nothing but to become a 
private perquisite, as it has been, to Mr. Hastings, 
to be granted to whom he pleased. The English 
government succeeded. Mr. Hastings was ap- 
pointed to it by an act of parliament, having 
been appointed to the Presidency before, to 
reform abuses. And in those two periods of his 
Presidency and his appointment by act of parlia- 
ment were those crimes committed of which he 
now stands accused. All this history is merely 
by way of illustration. His crimination begins 
with his nomination to the Presidency, and his 
subsequent nomination by parliament. 

The troubled period between the year 1756 and 
the settlement made in the year 1774 being passed, 
Mr. Hastings having the government in his hands. 



142 


EDMUND BURKE 


we are to consider how he comported himself in 
it. My lords, the first thing in considering the 
character of any Governor is to have some test by 
which it may be tried. And we conceive here that 
when a British Governor is sent abroad, he is sent 
to pursue the good of the people as anuch as 
possible in the spirit of the laws of this country, 
which intend in all respects their conservation, 
their happiness, and their prosperity. These are 
the principles upon which Mr. Hastings was bound 
to govern, and upon which he is to account for 
his conduct here. 

The rule upon which you are to try him is this — 
what should a British Governor in such a situation 
do, or forbear to do ? If he has done and if he 
has forborne in the manner in which a British 
Governor ought to do and to forbear, he has done 
his duty, and he is honourably acquitted. He 
resorts to other principles and to other maxims ; 
but this country will force him to be tried by its 
laws. The law of this country recognizes that 
well-known crime called misconduct in office. It 
is a head of the law of England ; and, so far as 
inferior courts are competent to try it, it may be 
tried there. Here your lordships are competent 
to everything ; and as you are competent in the 
power you are competent in the knowledge of the 
offence. And here I am bound to state to your 
lordships, by the directions of those whose direc- 
tions I am bound to follow, the principles upon 
which Mr. Hastings declares he has conducted 
his government ; which principles he declares, 
first in several letters written to the East 
India Company, next in a paper of defence 
delivered to the House of Commons explicitly. 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 143 

and more explicitly in his defence before your 
lordships. 

I am directed first to clear the way of all those 
grounds and principles upon which he frames his 
defence ; for, if those grounds are good and valid, 
they carry off a great deal at least, if not entirely, 
the foundation of our charge. My lords, we contend 
that Mr. Hastings, as a British Governor, ought to 
govern upon British principles, not by British 
forms. God forbid 1 for if ever there was a case in 
which the letter kills and the spirit gives life, it 
would be an attempt to introduce British forms 
and the substance of despotic principles together 
into any country. No ! We call for that spirit of 
equity, that spirit of justice, that sj^irit of safety, 
that spirit of protection, that spirit of lenity, which 
ought to characterize every British subject in 
power ; and upon these, and these principles only, 
he will be tried. 

But he has told your lordships in his defence, 
that actions in Asia do not bear the same moral 
qualities as the same actions would bear in Europe. 
My lords, we positively deny that principle. I am 
authorized and called upon to deny it. And having 
stated at large what he means by saying that the 
same actions have not the same qualities in Asia 
and in Europe, we are to let your lordships know 
that these gentlemen have formed a plan of 
geographical morality, by which the duties of men 
in public and in private situations are not to be 
governed by their relations to the great governor 
of the universe, or by their relations to men, but 
by climates, degrees of longitude and latitude, 
parallels not of life but of latitudes ; as if, when 
you have crossed the equinoctial line, all the virtues 



44 


EDMUOT BURKE 


die, as they say some animals die when they cross 
the line ; as if there were a kind of baptism, like 
that practised by seamen, by which they unbaptize 
themselves of all that they learned in Europe, and 
commence a new order and system of things. 

This geographical morality we do protest against. 
Mr. Hastings shall not screen himself under it. 
And I hope and trust not a great many words 
will be necessary to satisfy your lordships — 
but we think it necessary, in justification of our- 
selves, to declare — that the laws of morality are 
the same everywhere, and that there is no action 
which would pass for an action of extortion, of 
peculation, of bribery, and ’of oppression, inEngland 
that is not an act of extortion, of peculation, of 
bribery and oppression, in Europe, Asia, Africa, 
and all the \vorld over. This I contend for, not in 
the forms of it, but I contend for it in the substance. 

Mr. Hastings comes before your lordships not 
as a British Governor answering to a British 
tribunal, but as a subahdar, as a Pacha of three 
tails. He says : ‘ I had an arbitrary power to 
exercise ; I exercised it. Slaves I found the 
people ; slaves they are. They are so by their 
constitution ; and if they are, I did not make it 
for them. I was unfortunately bound to exercise 
this arbitrary power, and accordingly I did exercise 
it. It was disagreeable to me, but I did exercise it, 
and no other power can be exercised in that 
country.’ This, if it be true, is a plea in bar. But 
I trust and hope your lordships will not judge by 
laws and institutions which you do not know, 
against those laws and institutions which you do 
know, and under whose power and authority Mr. 
Hastings went out to India. Can your lordships 



IMPEACHMENT OF WAREEN HASTINGS 145 

patiently hear what we, have heard with indignation 
enough, and what, if there were nothing else, would 
call these principles as well as the actions, which 
are justified upon such principles, to your lord- 
ships’ bar ; that it may be known whether the 
Peers of England do not sympathize with the 
Commons in their detestation of such doctrine ? 
Think of an English Governor tried before you as a 
British subject, and yet declaring that he governed 
upon the principles of arbitrary power ! This 
plea is, that he did govern there upon arbitrary 
and despotic, and, as he supposes, Oriental prin- 
ciples. And as this plea is boldly avowed and 
maintained, and as, no doubt, all his conduct was 
perfectly correspondent to these principles, these 
principles and that conduct must be tried together. 

If your lordships will permit me, I will state one 
of the many places in which he has avowed these 
principles as the basis and foundation of all his 
conduct : 

‘ The sovereignty which they assumed, it fell to my lot, 
very unexpectedly, to exert ; and whether or not such 
power or powers of that nature were delegated to me by 
any provisions of any Act of Parliament, I confess myself 
too little of a lawyer to pronounce. I only know that the 
acceptance of the sovereignty of Benares, &c., is not 
acknowledged or admitted by any Act of Parliament ; 
and yet, by the particular interference of the majority of 
the council, the Company is clearly and indisputably 
seised of that sovereignty. 

So that this gentleman, because he is not a lawyer, 
nor clothed with those robes which distinguish 
and well distinguish the learning of this country, 
is not to know anything of his duty ; and whether 
he was bound by any, or what act of parliament, m 
a thing he is not lawyer enough to know. Now, if 



146 


EDMUND BURKE 


your lordships will sufier the laws to be broken by 
those that are not of the long robe, I am afraid 
those of the long robe will have none to punish but 
those of their own profession. Mr. Hastings, there- 
fore, goes to a law which he knows better, that is, 
the law of arbitrary power and force, if it deserves 
to be called by any such name. ‘ If, therefore 
says he, — 

* the sovereignty of Benares, as ceded to us by the Vizier, 
have any rights whatever annexed to it, and be not a mere 
empty word without meaning, those rights must be such 
as are held, countenanced, and established, by the law, 
custom, and usa^, of the Mogul empire, and not by the 
provisions of any British Act of Parliament hitherto enacted. 
Those rights, and none other, I have been the involuntary 
instrument of enforcing. And if any future Act of Parlia- 
ment shall positively, or by implication, tend to annihilate 
those very rights or their exertion, as I have exerted them, 
I much fear that the boasted sovereignty of Benares, which 
was held up as an acquisition almost obtruded upon the 
Company against my consent and opinion — for I acknow- 
ledge that oven then I foresaw many difficulties and 
inconvenumces in its future exercise — I fear, I say, that 
this sovereignty will be found a burden instead of a benefit, 
a heavy clog rather than a precious gem to its present 
possessors ; I mean, unless the whole of our territory in 
that quarter shall be rounded and made a uniform com- 
pact body bj one grand and systematic arrangement, 
such an arrangement, as shall do away all the mischiefs, 
doubts, and inconveniences, both to the governors and the 
governed, arising from the variety of tenures, rights, and 
claims, in all cases, of landed property and feudal jurisdic- 
tion in India, from the informality, invalidity, and instabi- 
lity, of all engagements in so divided and unsettled a state 
of society, and from the unavoidable anarchy and confusion 
of different laws, religions, and prejudices, moral, civil, 
and political, all jumbled together in one unnatural and 
discordant mass. ' 

Every part of Hindustan has been constantly exposed 
to these and similar disadvantages ever since the Moham- 
medan conquests. The Hindus, who never incorporated 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 147 


with their conquerors, were kept in order only by the 
strong hand of power. The constant necessity of similar 
exertions would increase at once their energy and extent ; 
so that rebellion itself is the parent and promoter of 
despotism. Sovereignty in India implies nothing else ; 
for 1 know not how we can form an estimate of its powers 
but from its visible effects, and those are everjrwhere the 
same from Kabool to Assam. The whole history of Asia 
is nothing more than precedents to prove the invariable 
exercise of arbitrary power. To all this I strongly alluded 
in the minutes I delivered in Council, when the treaty with 
the new Vizier was on foot in 1775 ; and I wished to make 
Cheit Sing independent, because in India dependence 
included a thousand evils, many of which I enumerated at 
that time, and they are entered in the ninth clause of the 
first section of this charge. I knew the powers with which 
an Indian sovereignty is armed, and the dangers to which 
tributaries are exposed. I knew that, from the history of 
Asia, and from the very nature of mankind, the subjects 
of a despotic empire are always vigilant for the moment to 
rebel, and the sovereign is ever jealous of rebellious 
intentions. A zemindar is an Indian subject, and, as such, 
exposed to the common lot of his fellows. “ The mean and 
depraved state of a mere zemindar ” is therefore this very 
dependence above mentioned on a despotic government, 
this very proneness to shake off his allegiance, and this 
very exposure to continual danger from his sovereign’s 
jealousy, which are consequent on the political state of 
Hindustanic governments. Bulwant Sing, if he had been, 
and Cheit Sing, as long as he was, a zemindar, stood 
exactly in this “mean and depraved state” by the con- 
stitution of his country. I did not make it for him, but 
would have secured him from it. Those who made him a 
zemindar entailed upon him the consequences of so mean 
and depraved a tenure. Alivordi Khan and Cossim Ali 
fined all their zemindars, on the necessities of war and on 
every pretence, either of court necessity or court ex- 
travagance.’ 

My lords, you have now heard the principles 
upon which Mr. Hastings governs the part of Asia 
subjected to the British empire. You have heard 
his opinion of ‘ the mean and depraved state ’ of 



148 


EDMUND BURKE 


those who are subject to it. You have heard his 
lecture upon arbitrary power, which he states to 
be the constitution of Asia. You hear the applica- 
tion that he makes of it ; and you hear the practices 
which he employs to justify it, and who the persons 
were the authority of whose examples he. professes 
to follow. Do your lordships really think that the 
nation would bear, that any human creature would 
bear, to hear an English governor defend himself 
upon such principles ? For, if he can defend 
himself upon such principles, no man has any 
security for anything but by being totally inde- 
pendent of the British Government. Here he has 
declared his opinion that he is a despotic prince, 
that he is to use arbitrary power ; and of course 
all his acts are covered with that shield. ‘ I know,’ 
says he, ‘ the constitution of Asia only from its 
practices.’ Will your lordships ever bear the 
corrupt practices of mankind made the principles 
of government ? It will be your pride and glory to 
teach men that they are to confirm their practices 
to principles, and not to draw their principles from 
the corrupt practices of any man whatever. Was 
there ever heard, or could it be conceived, that a 
man would dare to mention the practices of all the 
villains, all the mad usurpers, all the thieves and 
robbers, in Asia, that he should gather them all up, 
and form the whole mass of abuses into one code 
and call it the duty of a British governor ? I 
believe that till this time so audacious a thing was 
never attempted by mankind. 

He to have arbitrary power ! My lords, the East 
India Company have not arbitrary power to give 
him ; the King has no arbitrary power to give him ; 
your lordships have not ; nor the Commons ; nor 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 149 

the whole legislature. We have no arbitrary power 
to give, because arbitrary power is the thing which 
neither any man can hold nor any man can give 
away. No man can govern himself by bis own will, 
much less can he be governed by the will of others. 
We are all born in subjection, all born equally, 
high and low, governors and governed, in sub- 
jection to one great, immutable, pre-existent law, 
prior to all our devices and prior to all our con- 
trivances, paramount to our very being itself, by 
which we are knit and connected in the eternal 
frame of the universe, out of which we cannot stir. 

This great law does not arise from our conven- 
tions or compacts ; on the contrary, it gives to our 
conventions and compacts all the force and sanction 
they can have ; it does not arise from our vain 
institutions. Every good gift is of God, all power 
is of God ; and He who has given the power, and 
from whom it alone originates, will never suffer 
the exercise of it to be practised upon any less solid 
foundation than the power itself. Therefore, will 
it be imagined, if this be true, that He will suffer 
this great gift of government, the greatest, the 
best, that was ever given by God to mankind, to 
be the plaything and the sport of the feeble will 
of a man, who, by a blasphemous, absurd, and 
petulant usurpation, would place his own feeble, 
contemptible, ridiculous will in the place of the 
Divine wisdom and justice ? No, my lords. It is 
not to be had by conquest ; for by conquest, which 
is a more immediate designation of the hand of 
God, the conqueror only succeeds to all the painful 
duties and subordination to the power of God which 
belonged to the sovereign that held the country 
before. He cannot have it by succession ; for no 



160 


EDMUND BURKE 


man can succeed to fraud, rapine, and violence, 
neither by compact, covenant, or submission, nor 
by any other means, can arbitrary power be con- 
veyed to any man. Those who give and those who 
receive arbitrary power are alike criminal, and 
there is no man but is bound to resist it to the best 
of his power, wherever it shall show its face to 
the world. Nothing but absolute impotence can 
justify men in not resisting it to the best of their 
power. 

Law and arbitrary power are at eternal enmity. 
Name me a magistrate, and I will name property ; 
name me power, and I will name protection. It is 
a contradiction in terms, it is blasphemy in religion, 
it is wickedness in politics, to say that any man 
can have arbitrary power. Judges are guided and 
governed by the eternal laws of justice, to which 
we are all subject. We may bite our chains if we 
will, but we shall be made to know ourselves, and 
be taught that man is born to be governed by law ; 
and he that will substitute will ki the place of it is 
an enemy to God. . . . 

Therefore I charge Mr. Hastings — and we shall 
charge him afterwards, when we come to bring 
the evidence more directly and fully home — with 
having destroyed, for private purposes, the whole 
system of government by the six provincial councils 
which he had no right to destroy. 

I charge him with having delegated away from 
himself that power which the act of parliament had 
directed him to preserve inalienably in himself. 

I charge him with having formed a committee 
to be mere instruments and tools, at the enormous 
expense of £62,000 per annum. 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 161 


I charge him with having appointed a person 
their diwan, to whom these Englishmen were to be 
subservient tools, whose name was — to his own 
knowledge, by the general voice of the Company, 
by the recorded official transactions, by everything 
that can make a man known — abhorred and de- 
tested, stamped with infamy ; and I charge him 
with the whole power which he had thus separated 
from the Council General and from the provincial 
councils. 

I charge him with taking bribes of Gunga Govind 
Sing. 

I charge him with not having done that bribe- 
service which fidelity, even in iniquity, requires at 
the hands of the worst of men. 

I charge him with having robbed those people 
of whom he took the bribes. 

I charge him with having fraudulently alienated 
the fortunes of widows. 

I charge him with having, without right, title, or 
purchase, taken the lands of orphans and given 
them to wicked persons under him. 

I charge him with having removed the natural 
guardians of a minor Raja, and given his zemindary 
to that wicked person, Deby Sing. 

I charge him — his wickedness being known to 
himself and all the world — ^with having committed 
to Deby Sing the management of three great 
provinces ; and with having thereby wasted the 
country, destroyed the landed interest, cruelly 
harassed the peasants, burnt their houses, seized 
their crops, tortured and degraded their persons, 
and destroyed the honour of the whole female race 
of that country. 

In the name of the Commons of England, I charge 



162 


EDMUND BURKE 


all tkis villany upon Warren Hastings in this last* 
moment of my application to you. 

My lords, what is it that we want here to a great 
act of national justice ? Do we want a cause, my 
lords ? You have the cause of oppressed princes, 
of undone women of the first rank, of desolated 
provinces and of wasted kingdoms. 

Do you want a criminal, my lords ? When was 
there so much iniquity ever laid to the charge of 
any one ? No, my lords, you must not look to 
punish any delinquent in India more. Warren 
Hastings has not left substance enough in India 
to nourish such another delinquent. 

My lords, is it a prosecutor that you want ? 
You have before you the Commons of Great Britain 
as prosecutors ; and I believe, my lords, that the 
sun, in his beneficient progress round the world, 
does not behold a more glorious sight than that 
of men, separated from a remote people by the 
material bounds and barriers of nature, united by 
the bond of a social and moral community ; — all the 
Commons of England resenting as their own the 
indignities and cruelties that are offered to all 
the people of India. 

Do we want a tribunal ? My lords, no example 
of antiquity, nothing in the modern world, nothing 
in the range of human imagination, can supply us 
with a tribunal like this. My lords, here we see 
virtually, in the mind’s eye, that sacred majesty 
of the Crown, under whose authority you sit and 
whose power you exercise. We see in that invisible 
authority, what we all feel in reality and life, the 
beneficent powers and protecting justice of his 
Majesty. We have here the heir apparent to the 
Crown, such as the fond wishes of the people of 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 153 

England wish an heir apparent of the Crown to be. 
We have here all the branches of the royal family, 
in a situation between majesty and subjection, 
between the Crown and the subject, offering a 
pledge in that situation for the support of the 
rights of the Crown and the liberties of the people, 
both which extremities they touch. My lords, we 
have a great hereditary peerage here ; those who 
have their own honour, the honour of their ances- 
tors and of their posterity, to guard ; and who will 
justify, as they have always justified, that provision 
in the constitution by which justice is made an 
hereditary office. My lords, we have here a new 
nobility, who have risen and exalted themselves 
by various merits, by great military services, which 
have extended the fame of this country from the 
rising to the setting sun. We have those who, by 
various civil merits and various civil talents, have 
been exalted to a situation which they well deserve, 
and in which they will justify the favour of their 
sovereign and the good opinion of their fellow- 
subjects, and make them rejoice to see tho8(^ 
virtuous characters, that were the other day upon 
a level with them, now exalted above them in rank, 
but feeling with them in sympathy what they felt 
in common before. We have persons exalted from 
the practice of the law, from the place in which 
they administered high though subordinate justice, 
to a seat here, to enlighten with their knowledge 
and to strengthen with their votes those principles 
which have distinguished the courts in which they 
have presided. 

My lords, you have before you the lights of our 
religion — you have the bishops of England. My 
lords, you have that true image of the primitive 



154 


EDMUND BURKE 


church in its ancient form, in its ancient ordinances, 
purified from the superstitions and the vices which 
a long succession of ages will bring upon the best 
institutions. You have the representatives of that 
religion which says that ‘ God is love that the 
very vital spirit ©f its institution is charity ; a 
religion which so much hates oppression, that, 
when the God whom we adore appeared in human 
form, he did not appear in a form of greatness and 
majesty, but in sympathy with the lowest of the 
people ; and thereby made it a firm and ruling 
principle that their welfare was the object of all 
government, since the person who was the master 
of nature chose to appear himself in a subordinate 
situation. These are the considerations which 
influence them, which animate them and will 
animate them against all oppression ; knowing 
that he who is called first among them, and first 
among us all, both of the flock that is fed and 
of those who feed it, made himself ‘ the servant 
of all 

My lords, these are the securities that we have 
in all the constituent parts of the body of this 
house. We know them, we reckon, we rest, upon 
them ; and commit safely the interests of India 
and of humanity into their hands. Therefore it is 
with confidence that, ordered by the Commons, 

I impeach Warren Hastings, Esquire, of high 
crimes and misdemeanours. 

I impeach him in the name of the Commons of 
Great Britain in Parliament assembled, whose 
parliamentary trust he has betrayed. 

I impeach him in the name of all the Commons 
of Great Britain, whose national character he has 
dishonoured. 



IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS 155 


I impeach him in the name of the people of India, 
whose laws, rights, and liberties, he has subverted, 
whose properties he has destroyed, whose country 
he has laid waste and desolate. 

I impeach him in the name and by virtue of 
those eternal laws of justice which he has violated. 

I impeach him in the name of human nature 
itself, which he has cruelly outraged, injured, and 
oppressed, in both sexes, in every age, rank, situa- 
tion, and condition of life. 

15 . Earl Ccrrnwallis to the Court of Directors, 
2 August 1789 
Honourable Sirs, 

You will observe by Mr. Ives’s correspondence 
that great pains have been taken to obtain the 
benefits that were expected to result to both 
parties from the commercial treaty with the 
Vizier by pressing the minister to carry it into full 
effect in his Excellency’s dominions. 

I have sufficient reason to believe that Hyder 
Beg Khan is anxious to preserve my good opinion 
of his public conduct by doing everything in his 
power to execute strictly all stipulations on the 
part of the Vizier with the Company, and to 
establish internal order and good government in 
his master’s territories. But unluckily the Vizier’s 
early habits of dissipation and inattention to 
business have not yet entirely left him, and he is 
so apt to suffer his conduct to be influenced by 
very undeserving people, with whom he sometimes 
associates, that the wishes and intentions of the 
minister cannot always be completely executed. 
Inconvenient, however, as those defects in his 



156 


EARL CORNWALLIS 


Excellency’s character may be, it is not easy to 
find effectual remedies for them. 

Material omissions are generally corrected im- 
mediately upon my representation. But I think 
it infinitely more for the real advantage as well as 
more creditable to the Company, to bear deficiencies 
of no great importance on the part of his Excellency 
with a little patience, rather than attempt to 
renew the species of interference in the details of 
his government through the medium of our Resi- 
dent, which has been so judiciously reprobated 
by your honourable Court, and from which I have 
ever most carefully abstained. 

The causes to which I have alluded, occasioned 
some delay in reaping all the advantages that 
might result to both countries from the late 
commercial arrangements ; but the mutual utility 
of the treaty is apparent, and our large and 
increasing collections of duties at the Custom- 
house at Maunjee are sufficient proofs of the 
particular benefits which have already arisen from 
it to the commerce of the provinces. . . . 

Mr. Duncan’s conduct has contributed to 
promote the extension of commerce and agriculture 
and great progress has been made in establishing 
a system for the regular administration of justice, 
which alone can secure the happiness of the body 
of the people in that valuable province. 

The great additional resort of Deccan merchants 
to the mart of Mirzapore, and the applications 
that have been lately made for tracts of ground to 
increase the buildings at that place, have been very 
pleasing indications of the commercial improve- 
ments ; and it has likewise been with peculiar 
satisfaction that I have lately received a con- 



TO THE COURT OP DIRECTORS, 1789 157 

vincing proof of the good effects of hia judicious 
management upon the minds of the neighbouring 
powers by an application from Nana Furnavese, 
the First Minister of the Mahratta state, for leave 
to build a house for himself in the city of Benares, 
for the avowed purpose of resorting to it occasion- 
ally to perform religious duties ; and this applica- 
tion has given me the more pleasure, as the resolu- 
tion Was deliberately adopted upon the report 
of Mhadajee Pundit, his own household Dewan, 
whom he sent privately last year with a caravan of 
pilgrims, to make his observations, and who it 
seems had given a most favourable account of the 
mildness and regularity of the British Govern- 
ment. 

The future substantial interests of the Company, 
and the prosperity and happiness of millions of 
people, are so deeply concerned in the plan of 
settlement of land-revenues of those provinces, 
that before I should proceed to execute the orders 
contained in your revenue letter, dated the 12th 
April 1786, I thought it my indispensable duty to 
acquire every information in my power, and give 
the whole subject the most mature consideration. 

Although Mr. Shore’s precarious health has 
frequently interrupted his exertions, I consider 
it is singularly fortunate that the public could 
profit from his great experience and uncommon 
abilities upon this important occasion. 

His exertions were no less able than laborious in 
obtaining the materials that were necessary for 
arranging the principles on which the settlement 
of the province of Behar is proposed to be mad^. 
But as the revenue letter from the Board gives 
you a, full account of the plan of that settlement, 



EARL CORNWALLIS 


158 

I think it uimecessary to trouble, you with a 
particular stateihent of it. 

* There will probabljrbe vory little alteration in 
the principles of the plan that will be adopted for 
the settlement of Bengal, and after having given 
the subject much serious consideratibn I think 
myself bound, in justice to my own feelings, and 
to my opinion of the true interests of the Company, 
and the British nation, to declare my strongest 
conviction that the outlines of the plan now 
proposed, are well calculated to secure and even 
increase your revenues, and at the -same time to 
raise the national reputation, by its giving a 
prospect of comfort and happiness to the natives 
of those valuable dominions, far beyond that which 
they have hitherto enjoyed under any other 
masters. 

Many subsidiary arrangements will be requisite 
to render the principles of the plan applicable to the 
various rights and customs that exist in different 
parts of those provinces, and they must be made 
by government, either as the propriety of them 
may appear to observation, or as cases may be 
brought forward by representation. 

The security of property, however, and the 
certainty which each individual will now feel of 
being allowed to enjoy the fruits of his own labours, 
must operate uniformly as incitements to exertion 
and industry ; and I have purposely in this 
settlement proposed to withdraw the Gunges from 
the zemindars, and to place them in the* hands of 
government in order that it may at all times have 
an unrestrained power to raise or lower the internal 
taxes, or duties on particular articles of produce 
or manufacture, as may be found most suitable 



TO THE GOURT; OF DIRECTORS, 1789 169 

to the generoj. interests of commerce ; but above 
all, as the land-re-^enues, when thl^ Jumma is once 
fixed,, caniiot increase^ that the Company may;^ 
through the medium of duties upon atn increased 
consumptibn of the necessaries and luxuries of life, 
participate, in the wealth and advantages, which, I 
trust, will be consequences of a permanent revenue 
settlement the inhabitants of this country. 

The humane and liberal sentiments which 
dictated the instructions upon which the present 
plan is foimded, will prompt you to receive the 
highest gratification, if my hopes of its producing 
wealth and happiness to the intelligent and 
industrious part of the individuals of the coutitry 
shall be realized ; and, independent of all other 
consideralions, I can assure you that it will be of 
the utmost importance for promoting the solid 
interests of the Company, that the principal land- 
holders and traders in the interior parts of the 
country should be restored to such circumstances 
as to enable them to support their families with 
decency, and to give a liberal education to their 
children according to the customs of their respec- 
tive castes and religions — ^that a regular gradation 
of ranks may be supported, which is nowhere more 
necessary than in this country for preserving order 
in civil society. 

I am sorry to be obliged to say that agriculture 
and internal commerce has for many years been 
gradually declining, and that, at present, excepting 
the class of Shroffs and Banians, who reside almost 
entirely in great towns, the inhabitants of those 
provinces , were advancing hastily to a general 
state of poverty and wretchedness. ^ 

In this description, I must include almost every 



160 EARL CORNWALLIS 

zemindar in the Company’s territories, which, 
though it may have been partly occasioned by their 
own indolence and extravagance, I am afraid must 
also be in a great measure attributed to the defects 
of our former system of government. 

The settlement, in conformity to your orders, 
will be made for ten years certain, with a notifica- 
tion of its being your intention to declare it a 
perpetual and unalterable assessment of these 
provinces, if the amount and the principle upon 
which it has been made shall meet with your 
approbation. 

The circulation of specie in this country has been 
so long embarrassed with so great a variety of 
rupees of different qualities and denominations, 
that the Shroffs have found an ample field for 
practising their arts in extorting an extravagant 
batta upon almost every pecuniary transaction in 
which they are concerned, to the heavy oppression 
of individuals, and in many instances to the great 
detriment of the Company’s revenue ; and there 
appears to be no effectual remedy for the evil but 
of a general new coinage of all the circulating 
silver of the country into rupees, or subdivisions 
of rupees, of exactly the same weight, standard, 
and denomination. 

Amongst the other preparatory steps that have 
been taken to carry this measure into execution, 
it has been determined that all revenue settlements 
shall be made in Sicca rupees, and you may be 
assured that I shall spare no pains, and neglect no 
percaution to accomplish with safety this salutary 
work. 

As the opium contract terminates this season, 
proposals for a new contract for the term of four 



TO THE COURT OP DIRECTORS, 1789 161 

years, as before, have been called for by public 
advertisement. 

The opium ryots were by the terms of the late 
contract left so much in the power of the con- 
tractor, that it has been chiefly owing to the 
moderation and forbearance of Mr. Heatly, who 
held that contract, that they have not for some 
time past suffered great vexation and distress. 

A regard for the true interests of the Company, 
no less than the irresistible claims of humanity, 
rendered it necessary to give these poor people the 
protection of the laws against personal violence, 
and to enable them to make an equitable bargain 
with the contractor for the produce of their 
labours. 

I think it probable that the relief which has 
been given to the ryots may occasion some decrease 
of price on the offers that will be made by the 
candidates for the contract, but I am persuaded 
that the loss upon that head will be more than 
compensated to the Company by the encourage- 
ment which will be given to the ryots to extend 
the cultivation of the poppy, and by the measures 
which have been adopted being calculated to 
promote the general prosperity of the districts in 
which it is produced. 

I thought that upon the whole it would be more 
beneficial for the Company that the Benares 
opium should also be provided in future by con- 
tract, and it is accordingly offered to the fairest 
bidder on the present occasion, under nearly the 
same conditions for securing good treatment to 
the ryots as those that are prescribed for Behar 
and Bengal. 

An infamous traffic has, it seems, been carried 



162 EARL CORNWALLIS 

on in this country by the low Portuguese, and even 
by several foreign European seafaring people 
and traders, in purchasing and collecting native 
children in clandestine manner, and exporting 
them for sale to the French islands and other parts 
of India. 

I have at different times taken steps to prevent 
the continuance of practices which are so shocking 
to humanity, and so pernicious to your interests, 
and in order to deter all persons under the authority 
of this Government from being concerned in that 
species of trade, I lately directed that a commander 
of a country vessel, who carried off some children 
last winter, should be prosecuted criminally before 
the Supreme Court ; and I likewise published a 
proclamation to give notice, that any person living 
under the Company’s protection, or in any shape 
under the authority of this Government, who shall 
be convicted of carrying on, or aiding, or abetting 
the barbarous traffic that I have mentioned, will 
be certain of meeting with the most exemplary 
punishment. 

There are many obstacles in the way against 
abolishing slavery entirely in the Company’s 
dominions, as the number of slaves is consider- 
able, and the practice is sanctioned both by the 
Mahomedan and Hindoo laws. 

I have, however, a plan under consideration, 
which I hope to be able to execute without doing 
much injury to the private interests, or offering 
great violence to the feelings of the natives, and 
which has for its object the abolition of the practice 
under certain limitations, and the establishing 
some rules and regulations to alleviate as much as 
may be possible the misery of those unfortunate 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1789 163 

people during the time that they may be retained 
in that wretched situation. 

The system for the administration of criminal 
justice under the direction of a Naib Nazim has 
long attracted my serious attention and is in my 
ojiinion in a most exceptionable state. 

I am sufficiently sensible that great caution will 
be necessary in endeavouring to reform so delicate 
a branch of the civil government ; but I feel myself 
called upon by the principles of humanity, and a 
regard for the honour and interest of the Company 
and the nation, not to leave this Government 
without endeavouring to take measures to prevent 
in future, on one hand, the cruel punishments of 
mutilation, which are frequently inflicted by the 
Mahomedan law, and on the other to restrain the 
spirit of corruption which so generally prevails in 
native courts, and by which wealthy offenders are 
generally enabled to purchase impunity for the 
most atrocious crimes. 

In making such alterations as may appear to 
be necessary for efiecting the above-mentioned 
purposes, you may be assured that the utmost care 
shall be taken to render the expense as light as 
possible to the Company. 

I conceive that all regulations for the reform of 
that department would be useless and nugatory, 
whilst the execution of them depends upon any 
native whatever, and that it will be indispensable 
for the good government of this country that there 
should be general jail-deliveries once;or twice a year, 
and that two or three respectable Company’s ser- 
vants should be selected to act as superintendents 
of the criminal trials, which may be conducted, 
under their inspection, by native judges, with the 



164 


EARL CORNWALLIS 


assistance of learned Moulavies and Pundits, in strict 
conformity to the laws and customs of Hindostan. 

Should these appointments appear to be expe- 
dient after further consideration, some reduction 
may be made in the present establishment of the 
Foujedarry department, from which the amotint 
of the salaries that it will be proper to allot to the 
superintendents may in part be defrayed. 

The salaries, however, ought at all events to be 
liberal, as upon the general principles that have 
been already applied to the arrangement of the 
other departments, the income of the superinten- 
dents should be limited to fixed and open allowances, 
without receiving any kind of perquisite whatever. 

In establishing these principles for regulating 
the allowances of your servants in all the branches 
of your service, I trust that I have aqted upon the 
soundest maxims of public economy. 

It is neither your expectation, nor would it be 
possible, to obtain the services of men of experience, 
ability, and character in this climate, where a 
continuation of health is so precarious, without 
granting them rewards in some shape sufficiently 
liberal to enable them to live in a decent and 
comfortable manner, and to make such annual 
savings as to give them a prospect of being able in 
a moderate number of years to return to spend the 
latter part of their days in easy circumstances at 
home. 

The generality of men would prefer making such 
a fortune by means the most open and avowed, 
and no mode can be more honourable than that of 
annual savings from an established public salarj^. 

When the allowed salaries are evidently in- 
adequate to the above purposes, and in a country 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1789 165 

where your principal servants are surrounded with 
temptations, it could not easily be denied that it 
seemed to be expected, though not regularly 
sanctioned by Government, that they should look 
to some other sources of income ; and in the 
pursuit of unauthorised gain by individuals in this 
country the public finances have often suffered 
great injury, and the poor natives in many in- 
stances very cruel oppressions. 

The toleration of perquisites is likewise detri- 
mental to the discipline of the service, for even 
when there is only an implied permission to take 
them, it is not easy to punish abuses, as after a 
beginning is suffered, distinct limits are with 
difficulty prescribed for the practice ; but when 
liberal salaries are allowed and accepted as a com- 
plete compensation for services, a Government 
can, without scruple, disgrace and remove from 
their offices all those servants who shall be detected 
in deviations from the straight line of private 
honour and of public duty. . . . 

The public credit of this Government has im- 
proved beyond the most sanguine hopes that I 
could have indulged a twelvemonth ago. The 
discount upon our certificates has not for some time 
past amounted to one and a half per cent. . . . 

I received a letter from Mr. James Macpherson, 
who styles himself agent for the Nabob of Arcot, 
enclosing a long remonstrance against the decision 
of this Government in the succession to the late 
Rajah of Tanjore. I enclose a copy of my answer 
to Mr. Macpherson, which will, I trust, meet with 
your approbation. 

I am, &c., 


Cornwallis. 



166 


EARL CORNWALLIS 


16 . Earl Corniuallis to the Court of Directors, 
6 March 1793 
Honourable Sirs, 

. . . The same principle which induced us to resolve 
upon the separation of the Talooks prompted us to 
recommend to you on the 30th March, 1792, the 
abolition of a custom introduced under the native 
government, by which most of the principal 
zemindarries in the country are made to descend 
entire to the eldest son, or next heir of the last 
incumbent, in opposition both to the Hindoo and 
the Mahomedan law, which admit of no exclusive 
right of inheritance in favour of primogeniture, 
but require that the property of a deceased person 
shall be divided amongst his sons or heirs in certain 
specified proportions. Finding, however, upon a 
reference to your former orders, that you had 
frequently expressed a wish that the large zemin- 
darries should be dismembered if it could be 
effected consistently with the principles of justice, 
we did not hesitate to adopt the measure without 
waiting for your sanction. We are happy to find 
that this measure corresponds so entirely with 
the sentiments which you have expressed in this 
paragraph respecting the good policy of dismem- 
bering these very large zemindarries, the evils 
attending which become every day more strongly 
impressed upon our minds. The zemindars whom 
the regulation will affect, cannot fail to be satisfied 
with it, as it leaves them at liberty to divide their 
property or to allow it to devolve to their heirs 
after their death, in the proportions to which they 
are entitled by law, or to keep it entire by devising 
the whole of it by will to any one of their heirs or 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1793 167 

relations. There can be no doubt but this regula- 
tion will be productive of the desired effect in due 
course of time, as it is to be presumed that many 
of the principal landholders, from motives of 
affection to their children, or with a view to con- 
form to the dictates of the law, will divide the 
property amongst their sons or heirs, or, by making 
no will, leave it to devolve to them in the propor- 
tions which they may be respectively entitled to 
inherit. 

With respect to your suggestion regarding waste 
lands, we do not hesitate to offer it as our opinion 
that any attempt to stipulate for a proportion of 
their produce would not only be considered a 
breach of the engagements entered into with the 
landholders, but that it would greatly counteract, 
if not altogether damp, that spirit of industry and 
improvement to excite which is the great object of 
fixing the tax upon each estate. 

It is necessary to apprise you (of what you could 
not have been aware) that all waste lands form a 
part of the estates of the different landholders, and 
the boundaries of the portions of those lands that 
belong to each individual are as well defined as the 
limits of the cultivated parts of their property, and 
that they are as tenacious of their right of posses- 
sion in the former as the latter. 

The waste lands may in general be comprehended 
under two descriptions. First, those in the level 
country which are interspersed in more or less 
extensive tracts amongst the cultivated lands ; 
and secondly, the Sunderbunds (the country along 
the sea-shore between Hoogly and Megna Rivers) 
and the foot of the vast grange of mountains which 
nearly encircle your Bengal provinces. 



168 


EARL CORNWALLIS 


The first-mentioned description of waste ground 
will be easily brought into cultivation when the 
zemindars have funds for that purpose, and pro- 
vided they are certain of reaping the profit arising 
from the improvement. These lands, however, are 
not wholly unproductive to them at present. They 
furnish pasture for the great herds of cattle that 
are necessary for the plough, and also to supply the 
inhabitants with ghee (a species of butter) and milk, 
two of the principal necessities of life in this 
country. It is true that the lands in this desolate 
state far exceed what would suffice for the above 
purposes, but it is the expectation of bringing 
them into cultivation, and reaping the profit of 
them, that has induced many to agree to the 
decennial jumma which has been assessed upon 
their lands. It is this additional resource alone 
which can place the landholders in a state of 
affluence, and enable them to guard against 
inundation or drought, the two calamities to which 
this country must ever be liable until the land- 
holders are enabled to provide (as we are of opinion 
they in a great measure might) by the above- 
mentioned and other works of art. To stipulate 
with them, therefore, for any part of the produce of 
their waste lands would not only diminish the 
incitement to these great and essential improve- 
ments in the agriculture of the country, but deprive 
them of the means of effecting it. In addition to 
these weighty objections it would be necessary, in 
order to obtain any revenue from the waste lands 
of this description, to enter into innumerable and 
complicated scrutinies and measurements in the 
first instance to ascertain the proportions of waste 
and cultivated lands in each individual estate, and 



TO THE COUET OF DIRECTORS, 1793 169 

to renew them annually or occasionally to know 
the progress made in the cultivation of the latter. 
The altercations and vexatious oppressions, and 
the great expense, which would inevitably result in 
settling what proportion of these waste lands should 
be liable to assessment, and the rates at which they 
should be taxed, would certainly destroy all ideas 
of a fixed taxation, and prevent the introduction of 
that spirit of industry and confidence in our good 
faith which is expected to result from it. The 
landholders and cultivators of the soil would 
continue (as they have hitherto been) little more 
than the farmers and labourers upon a great estate 
of which Government would be the landlord. In 
endeavouring, therefore, to obtain an addition to 
the public income by reserving a portion of the 
produce of the waste lands, Government would risk 
the realizing of the very ample revenue which has 
been assessed upon the country, and landed 
property would continue at the very depreciated 
value which it has hitherto borne. 

With respect to the second description of waste 
lands (the lower parts of the Sunderbunders 
perhaps excepted) they also include the estates of 
the individuals with whom the settlement is made. 
But supposing these lands to be at the disposal of 
Government, as they have for the most part been 
covered with forest or underwood from time 
immemorial, and as the soil is in itself, compared 
with that of the open country, unproductive, and 
(besides the labour and expense which would attend 
the bringing it into cultivation) its produce would 
be comparatively of little value, from the distance 
of the high roads and navigable rivers, and the 
consequent difficulty of bringing it to market. 

G 3 



170 EARL CORNWALLIS 

We are of opinion, therefore, that whilst there is 
a call for all the labour not only of the present 
inhabitants, but of the greatest increased popula- 
tion that peace and prosperity can be expected to 
produce, to bring the waste lands in the open 
country into cultivation, the labour of- any con- 
siderable number of people would be unprofitably 
bestowed upon such wild and inhospitable tracts, 
supposing it could be directed thereto by the grant 
of rewards or immunities, or by any other means. 
When the open country is brought into cultiva- 
tion, the industry of the people will then of itself 
be directed to these desolate tracts ; but as this 
cannot be expected to be the case for a long period 
of years, we think that any premature attention 
to these objects that might tend in any degree to 
interfere with the noble system of which you have 
laid the foundation, would be inconsistent with 
good policy, and defeat the end which it might be 
expected to answer. 

We think this a proper opportunity to observe 
that, if at any future period the public exigencies 
should require an addition to your resources, you 
must look for this addition in the increase of the 
general wealth and commerce of the country, and 
not in the augmentation of the tax upon the land. 
Although agriculture and commerce promote each 
other, yet in this country, more than in any other, 
agriculture must flourish before its commerce can 
become extensive. The materials for all the most 
valuable manufactures are the produce of its own 
lands. It follows therefore that the extent of its 
commerce must depend upon the encouragement 
given to agriculture, and that whatever tends to 
impede the latter destroys the two great sources of 



TO THE COURT OP DIRECTORS, 1793 171 

its wealth. At present almost the whole of your 
revenue is raised upon the lands, and any attempt 
to participate with the landholders in the produce 
of the waste lands would (as we have said) operate 
to discourage their being brought into cultivation, 
and consequently prevent the augmentation of 
articles for manufacture or export. The increase 
of cultivation (which nothing but permitting the 
landholders to reap the benefit of it can effect) will 
be productive of the opposite consequences. To 
what extent the trade and manufactures of this 
country may increase under the very liberal 
measures which have been adopted for enabling 
British subjects to convey their goods to Europe 
at a moderate freight, we can form no conjecture. 
We are satisfied, however, that it will far exceed 
general expectations, and the duties on the import 
and export trade (exclusive of any internal duties 
which it may in future be thought advisable to 
impose), that may hereafter be levied, will afford 
an ample increase to your resources, and without 
burdening the people or affecting in any shape the 
industry of the country. 

From the proceedings which we shall forward to 
you by the next dispatch, you will find that we 
have anticipated your wishes respecting the pattahs 
to be granted by the landholders to the ryots. It 
is with pleasure we acquaint you that throughout 
the greater part of the country specific agreements 
have been exchanged between the landholders and 
the ryots, and that where these writings have not 
been entered into, the landholders have bound 
themselves to prepare and deliver them by fixed 
periods. We shall here only observe that, under 
the new arrangements to which we shall presently 



172 


EARL CORNWALLIS 


advert, the ryots will always have it in their own 
power to compel an adherence to the agreements 
by an appeal to the courts of justice, whenever the 
landholders may attempt to infringe them. 

We now come to the very important part of your 
instructions empowering us to declare the tax 
assessed upon the lands in the provinces fixed for 
ever. 

From the advices which we have forwarded to 
you since the date of the latest letter acknowledged 
in your instructions, you will have perceived that 
so far from any circumstances having occurred to 
defeat your reasonable expectations of the result 
of the settlement, the jumma of it has exceeded the 
estimated amount, and that every occurrence has 
tended to confirm and strengthen the decided 
opinions which we formerly expressed of the 
expediency of the measure. We are not aware of 
any material reason that would render it advisable 
to postpone the declaration, whereas there are a 
variety of considerations which appear to us to 
make it highly expedient that the valuable rights 
and tenures which you have conferred upon the 
landholders in these provinces should be announced 
to them without delay. The seasons this year have 
been remarkably favourable, and abundance reigns 
throughout the country. The public credit is high, 
the paper in circulation bearing an interest of 
8 per cent, selling at a premium of 1 per cent., and 
the interest of money is proportionably low. As 
this paper is in course of payment, there is every 
ground to expect that the large capitals possessed 
by many of the natives (which they will have no 
means of employing when the public debt is 
discharged) will be applied to the purchase of 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1793 173 

landed property as soon as the tenure is declared 
to be secure, and they are capable of estimating 
what profit they will be certain of deriving from it 
by the public tax upon it being unalterably fixed. 
With respect to those landholders with whom a ten 
years’ settlement has been concluded, the announc- 
ing to them that their jumma is fixed for ever, will 
not only incline them to pay their current revenue 
with cheerfulness, but add to their ability to 
discharge it by the credit which they will obtain 
from the increased value of their tenures. On the 
other hand the declaration will not fail to render 
the few landholders who have not entered into 
engagements, eager to secure to themselves the 
same valuable rights and privileges. 

For the above reasons we should think it impolitic 
to delay the declaration that you have empowered 
us to make, the announcing of which will, we are 
persuaded, be considered as the commencement 
of the era of improvement and prosperity in this 
country. We shall be particularly careful that 
the notification is drawn up in the manner you 
prescribe, and that the terms of it may be calcu- 
lated to impress the landholders with the value and 
importance of the rights conferred upon them, and 
of your solicitude for their welfare and prosperity. 
We shall likewise, to prevent any further mis- 
conception, expressly reserve to you the right of 
establishing and collecting any internal duties that 
you may hereafter think proper to impose, and 
also declare your determination to assess all 
alienated or rent-free lands that may hereafter 
revert to Government, or be proved, after a regular 
trial in a court of justice, to be held under an 
invalid tenure. We shall further declare (although 



174 


EARL CORNWALLIS 


a clause to that effect has been inserted in the- 
engagements with the landholders) that you do not 
mean, by fixing the public demand upon the lands, 
to debar yourselves from the exercise of the right 
inherent in you as sovereigns of the country, of 
making such regulations as you may occasionally 
think proper for the protection of the ryots and 
inferior landholders, or other orders of people 
concerned in the cultivation of the lands, A desire 
to give this notification the consideration, that the 
importance of it merits, is the reason of its not 
having been transmitted to you by this dispatch. 

We now come to the close of your instructions, 
‘ the watching over and maturing of this system, 
maintaining under future administrations the 
energy which has commenced it,’ and to the other 
important points detailed in the paragraphs 
specified in the margin. 

It is with much satisfaction we acquaint you 
that we have endeavoured to provide for these 
important points, as well as for the administration 
of the laws and regulations in general, both civil 
and criminal. The arrangements which we have 
adopted for this purpose are contained in the 
accompanying copy of a minute from the Governor- 
General recorded in our proceedings of the 11th 
ultimo, and we have resolved to carry them into 
execution as soon as the collections for the Bengal 
year are brought to a close. For the reasons at 
large which have induced us to adopt these arrange- 
ments, as well as for the detail of them, we must 
refer you to the minute itself. We shall here only 
state some observations respecting them, as they 
are immediately connected with the part of your 
instructions above noticed. 



TO THE COURT OP DIRECTORS, 1793 176 

The next object which is most essential to the 
prosperity of your dominions, is the providing for 
the due enforcement not only of the regulations 
respecting the decennial settlement, but of the laws 
and regulations in general which in any respect 
affect the rights or property of your subjects. You 
will observe from the Governor-Generars minute 
that we have anticipated your remark (than 
which nothing can be more just) that the neglect 
of instituted regulations has been most noxious to 
your affairs, and we have long been of opinion that 
no system will ever be carried into effect so long as 
the personal qualifications of the individuals that 
may be appointed to superintend it, form the only 
security for the due execution of it. In this 
country, as in every other, security of property 
must be established by a system upheld by its 
inherent principles, and not by the men who are 
to have the occasional conduct of it. The body of 
the people must feel and be satisfied of this 
security before industry will exert itself, or the 
moneyed men embark their capitals in agricultural 
or commercial speculations. There are certain 
powers and functions which can never be vested 
in the same officers without destroying all con- 
fidence in the protection of the laws. This remark 
is particularly applicable to the various functions 
vested in the present collectors. All causes 
relating to the rights of the several descriptions of 
landholders and cultivators of the soil, and all 
claims arising between them and their securities, 
have been excepted from the cognizance of the 
regular courts of justice, and made exclusively 
cognizable by the collector of the revenue. This 
officer has of late years been allowed a commission 



176 


EARL CORNWALLIS 


upon the collections, and at aU times the realizing 
of the revenue has been considered as his most 
important duty, and any failure in the successful 
collection of it has subjected him to dismission 
from his office ; under such circumstances it was 
naturally to be expected that the collection of the 
revenue would be deemed by these officers the 
most important of their duties, and that all con- 
siderations of right would be made subservient to 
it. Where the power to redress oppressions, and 
functions that must always have a tendency to 
promote or screen the commission of them, are 
united in the same person, a strict adherence to the 
principles of justice cannot be expected, and still 
less can it be hoped that the people will feel a 
confidence of obtaining justice. Upon these and 
other grounds, which are fully detailed in the 
Governor-Generars minute, we resolved to abolish 
the Maal Adawluts or Revenue Courts, and to 
withdraw from the Board of the Revenue and the 
collectors, all judicial powers, thereby confining 
their duties and functions to the mere collection of 
the public dues, and to transfer the cognizance of 
the causes hitherto tried in these courts to the 
courts of justice. 

For a more particular detail of the constitution 
of these courts we must refer you to the Governor- 
GeneraFs minute, and we shall here only observe 
that courts of justice are to be continued in each 
collectorship as heretofore, which are to be de- 
nominated Zillah or District Courts, and that the 
judge thereof is to have cognizance over civil causes 
of all descriptions that may arise in his jurisdiction, 
whether of the nature of those termed revenue 
causes, and hitherto tried in the Revenue Courts, 



TO THE COURT OP DIRECTORS, 1793 177 

or of the description of those which have been 
cognizable in the courts of Dewanny Adawlut. 
We have resolved, likewise, that the collectors of 
revenue and their officers, and indeed all the officers 
of Government, shall be amenable to the courts 
for acts done in their official capacities, and that 
Government itself, in cases in which it may be a 
party with its subjects in matters of property, 
shall submit its rights to be tried in these courts 
under the existing laws and regulations. That 
these courts may have complete authority over 
all persons residing in their jurisdictions, and that 
natives may be able to procure redress against 
Europeans with the same facility as the latter can 
obtain it against the former, we have determined 
that no British subject (excepting King’s officers 
and the civil and the military covenanted servants 
of the Company) shall be allowed to reside beyond 
the limits of Calcutta, without entering into a bond 
to make himself amenable to the court of justice 
of the district in which he may be desirous of 
taking up his abode, in all civil causes that may be 
instituted against him by natives. The judges of 
these courts are also to be vested with the powers 
of magistrates to preserve the peace, and to appre- 
hend and commit offenders to take their trial before 
the Courts of Circuit. 

We have likewise resolved to establish four 
provincial Courts of Appeal at the cities of Patna, 
Dacca, Moorshedabad, and Calcutta ; each of 
these courts to be superintended by three judges : 
an appeal to lie to them in all cases whatsoever 
from the decisions of the Zillah or District and the 
City Courts within their respective jurisdictions. 
The appellate jurisdiction of these courts is to 



178 EARL CORNWALLIS 

extend over the same districts as are now compre- 
hended in the jurisdictions of the Courts of Circuit, 
and are as follows : . . . 

The city of Calcutta being under the jurisdiction 
of the Supreme Court of Judicature, the provincial 
Courts of Appeal will not have cognizance of any 
civil or criminal causes arising in it. 

The decrees of the provincial Courts of Appeal 
are to be final in all causes of personal property 
not exceeding in value one thousand rupees, and 
in suits for real property being malguzary, or 
paying revenue to Government, where the annual 
j)roduce shall not exceed five hundred rupees, and 
in causes for lakerage property (that is, paying no 
revenue to Government) where the annual produce 
shall not exceed one hundred. All decisions 
respecting personal or real property in causes 
exceeding the above amounts are to be appealable 
to the Supreme Boa'rd as a Court of Appeal in the 
last resort, and in their capacity of a Court of 
Sudder Dewanny Adawlut. 

We have likewise resolved that the jucjges of the 
provincial Courts of Appeal shall be judges of 
Circuit in their respective divisions. In this 
capacity they will exercise the same powers and 
duties as were vested in the judges of the Courts of 
Circuit on the 3rd December, 1790 (whose offices 
will consequently be abolished), and will be sub- 
ordinate to the Supreme Government in its 
capacity of a Nizamut Adawlut or Superior 
Criminal Court. The great additional advantage, 
however, which will result from this arrangement 
is that the provincial Courts of Appeal will consist 
of three judges ; the senior judge will go the circuit 
of one-half of the stations within their jurisdiction. 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1793 179 

whilst the other two perform the circuit of the 
remainder, and consequently the two annual jail- 
deliveries will by this means be effected in one-half 
of the time in which they are accomplished at 
present by the two judges proceeding together to 
each station. As to the cities, we have resolved 
that there shall be a jail-delivery every month, 
excepting during the time that the judge may be 
upon the circuit in the districts. 

We are, &c. 


17. The Governor-General [Marques^ Welles- 
ley] in Council to the Court of Directors, 

9 July 1800 
Honourable Sirs, 

The great pressure of the numerous and impor- 
tant duties now performed immediately by the 
Governor-General in Council, has induced us to 
take a review of the constitution of the Govern- 
ment-General, considered as the supreme authority 
in India. 

It has been his Lordship’s object in this review to 
determine what duties now executed immediately 
by the Governor-General in Council ought still 
to be performed by him ; what duties ought to 
be delegated to others establishments, and lastly to 
make a permanent provision for the due discharge 
of those duties which the Governor-General in 
Council must necessarily retain, as well as of those 
which it has been deemed advisable he should 
relinquish. 

In the discussion of these important questions 
we have not hesitated to consider the extensive 
and valuable possessions to the government of 



180 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

whicli the Company have succeeded, as ^ great 
Empire. To view those possessions in any other 
light, must, we are persuaded, always lead to the 
most erronous conclusions as to the principles of 
policy by which they ought to be governed. 

The early administration of the • Company 
succeeded to the despotic power of the native 
princes. 

Those princes, as in other despotic governments, 
united in their own persons the whole legislative, 
executive, and judicial powers of the State, and 
exercised them according to the dictates of their 
own discretion. 

No form of government could be so ill adapted 
to these countries when they became dependent 
possessions of the British Empire, subject to be 
governed by persons occasionally deputed from 
the Mother Country. 

Experience of the evils attendant on this form 
of government conducted by a delegated British 
administration, led to the modelling of the Govern- 
ment of Bengal, on principles drawn from the 
British Constitution. 

A distribution of the legislative, executive, and 
judicial powers of the State, analogous to that 
which forms the basis of the British Constitution, 
was made the foundation of the new constitution 
of the Government of Bengal, 

Considerations, however, arising out of the 
nature of our situation in this country demanded 
that these fundamental principles of the British 
Constitution should be introduced with a variety 
of modifications. 

The lines between these three authorities were 
distinctly drawn, but it was obviously necessary 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1800 181 

that the Governor-General in Council should 
exercise exclusively the entire legislative authority. 

But at the same time that we excluded our native 
subjects from all participation in the legislative 
authority, abundant security was afforded to them, 
that the exercise of that authority would always 
be directed to their happiness and benefit. 

The confirmation of their ancient laws in all 
matters connected with their religious prejudices, 
or their domestic relations, formed one of the first 
acts of the Governor-General in Council under the 
new constitution. 

Provision was also made for ascertaining the 
sense which the people might entertain of the laws 
and regulations enacted for the government of the 
country, by the authority given to the judges of 
all the Courts of Judicature to propose such general 
or local laws as, from their intercourse with the 
natives in the administration of justice, might 
appear to them necessary to promote the public 
happiness and prosperity. 

As an effectual security against every abuse of 
the legislative power vested in the Governor- 
General in Council, it was made a fundamental 
principle of the new constitution, that he shall 
print and publish every legislative Act in a form 
which renders him responsible to his country for 
the unjust or unwise exercise of that power. 

The executive authority was of necessity also 
exclusively vested in the Governor-General in 
Council. 

No check can be imposed on the Governor- 
General in Council in the exercise of this authority 
in the regulation of our connexion with the foreign 
States of India. But as our own interest, and that 



m THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

of our subjects with regard to those connexions, 
are necessarily the same, they have the best 
security that the most effectual means will always 
be taken to protect the country from foreign 
enemies. 

With regard to all acts of the executive power as 
they relate to the internal government of the 
country, the people possess the same security 
against any infringement by this power of the 
rights and principles which have been granted to 
them by the laws, as is enjoyed under the British 
Constitution. 

It was judged advisable, however, to restrict the 
control over the executive authority to cases 
actually provided for by the regulations. But as 
legislative provisions are made for all cases not 
included in the existing laws as such cases arise, 
the discretionary power which the Governor- 
General in Council may now exercise in cases of 
that nature, must in progress of time entirely 
cease. 

As constituting the Courts of Sudder Dewanny 
Adawlut and the Nizamut, or the chief civil or 
criminal courts, the Governor-General in Council 
also exercises a large portion of the judicial power. 

The reasons which originally occasioned the 
continuance of the entire legislative and executive 
authority in the Governor-General in Council are 
obviously of a permanent nature. 

There is no change in our situation in this country 
which can be supposed, in which it would be 
expedient to admit any part of our native subjects 
to participate in the legislative authority with the 
Governor-General in Council. 

The same principle applies to the executive 



TO THE COURT OP DIRECTORS, 1800 183 

authority of the Governor-General in Council, as far 
as regards the relations of the British possessions 
with foreign states. It can never be expedient 
that our native subjects should be allowed to 
interfere in those relations, or that any local re* 
strictions should be imposed on the Governor- 
General in Council, in the conduct of them. 

With regard to the executive authority of the 
Governor-General in Council, as far as it relates to 
the internal government of the country, this 
authority can only be vested in him. But the 
nature of our situation affords additional reasons 
for subjecting the executive authority in this 
branch gradually to the complete control of the 
law, in the same manner as that authority is 
restricted by the laws of the British Constitution. 

While our political security demands that the 
entire legislative and executive authority should 
continue to be vested exclusively in the Governor- 
General in Council agreeably to the principles of 
the existing constitution : it is at the same time 
a satisfaction to know, that under the checks 
which are imposed on the Governor-General in 
Council in the exercise of these powers, the union 
of them in his hands, (notwithstanding the objec- 
tions to which this union may be liable in theory) 
is perfectly compatible with the ends of good 
government. 

There are no circumstances however connected 
with our political situation in this country, which 
require that the Governor-General in Council 
should continue to exercise any portion of the 
judicial authority. 

It is equally necessary to the happiness of the 
people, to the prosperity of the country, and to the 



184 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

stability of the British GoverDment, that such 
laws as the Governor-General in Council may 
sanction in his legislative capacity, should be 
administered with ability, integrity, impartiality 
and expedition. 

All the provisions made by the British Constitu- 
tion for precluding the legislative and the executive 
powers of the State, from any interference in the 
administration of the laws, are not only applicable 
to the government of this country, but, if it were 
possible, demand to be strengthened. 

An efficient control may be exercised from 
England over the conduct of the Governor-General 
in Council in his legislative capacity. But no 
effectual control can be exercised over him in the 
administration of the laws, and he may render the 
laws altogether nugatory by abuses, omissions, or 
delays in their administration. 

It is essentially necessary that the security of 
private rights and property should be rendered 
altogether independent of the characters of those 
who may be occasionally placed at the head of 
your affairs in this country. This however, can 
never be the case, while the Governor-General in 
Council who makes the law, and whose acts in his 
executive capacity, as well as those of the long 
train of officers who exercise authority under him in 
that capacity also, constitute the chief courts which 
control the general administration of justice. 

No inconvenience can arise from divesting the 
Governor-General in Council of all immediate 
interference in the administration of the laws, while 
he has the power of altering at his pleasure the 
law itself. 

These objections to the exercise of any judicial 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1800 185 

power by the Governor-General in Council, are 
founded on general and established principles of 
government ; but other considerations render this 
duty incompatible with the proper functions of 
the Governor-General in Council. 

The administration of justice in open court 
is one of the principal securities for its due 
administration. 

The constant appearance of the Governor- 
General in Council in an open court of justice would 
be incompatible with that dignity which, to render 
him competent to the conduct of the government, 
it is essentially necessary that the person invested 
with the supreme executive and legislative power 
should maintain, not only in the estimation of the 
people immediately subject to his government, but 
also of the foreign powers. 

The presence of the Governor-General in Council 
in open court would prevent the pleading of causes 
with becoming freedom. No native pleader would 
venture to contest his opinions, and the will of the 
Governor-General, and not the law, would be con- 
sidered as the rule of decision. 

As the Governor-General must necessarily be 
often unacquainted with the languages of the 
country, this circumstance alone would render it 
impracticable for him to preside at trials in open 
court, unless it should be determined that the trials 
should be conducted in English, and by English 
pleaders. 

In consequence of these circumstances, the 
Courts of Sudder Dewanny Adawlut and Nizamut 
Adawlut are held in the council chamber. Neither 
the parties nor their pleaders are in any cases 
present. The proceedings are translated into 



186 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

English, and • read to the members of the Court 
who pass their decision, which the register records. 

The necessity of making these translations 
constitutes the chief cause of the delay in the 
decision of the causes which are brought before the 
civil and criminal courts. The translations cannot 
however be dispensed with, for the reasons above 
stated. They are also requisite for record and 
transmission to England, as they now constitute 
the only check on the Governor-General in Council 
in the administration of the law ; but for these 
considerations, no translations of the proceedings 
on trials would be necessary. 

But there is another object, unconnected with 
any of the above considerations, which is of itself 
sufficient to establish the necessity of divesting 
the Governor-General in Council of the judicial 
authority now exercised by him. 

A conscientious discharge of the duties of the 
Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, and the Nizamut 
Adawlut, would of itself occupy the whole time of 
the Governor-General in Council. 

The proper duties of these courts are not con- 
fined to the determination of the causes which 
are brought before them. It is also their duty to 
superintend the conduct of all the other courts, to 
watch over the general police of the country, and 
to frame for the consideration of the Governor - 
General in Council, new laws as cases may arise 
demanding further legislative provisions. 

When your Honourable Court shall’ advert to the 
extent of your dominions, to their population, to 
their growing prosperity, and to the consequent 
multiplied concerns of individuals, it will at once 
be evident that it is physically impossible that the 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1800; 187 

Governor-General in Council can ever dedicate 
that time and attention to the duties of these 
courts, which must necessarily be requisite for their 
due discharge. 

It is impossible to have the benefit of a regular 
and systematic government without numerous 
laws, and for the due administration of those laws, 
the necessary establishments must be provided. 

Of the value of a system of government founded 
on these principles as connected with your per- 
manent interests, a competent judgement may be 
formed by a comparison of the present state of 
your territories in Bengal, with that of your ancient 
possessions on the coast of Coromandel, as described 
in the able report of the Board of Revenue at Fort 
St. George, forwarded to your Honourable Court by 
this dispatch. 

These considerations have induced us to de- 
termine, under the sanction of the clause 

of the Act, of the year of the reign of his 

present Majesty, that the Governor-General, and 
the members of council shall not constitute the 
Court of Sudder Dewanny Adawlut in future, but 
that distinct judges shall be appointed to preside 
in that court, with all the powers and authorities 
now exercised by the Governor-General and the 
members of council, as the judges of that court. 

We have also determined, that the same judges 
shall constitute the Court of Nizamut Adawlut, 
with all the powers now exercised by the Governor- 
General and the members of council, as judges of 
that court. 

The adoption of this arrangement will establish 
the prosperity of your dominions in Bengal, on the 
most solid foundations. Your Honourable Court 



188 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

will yourselves be able to exercise the most effec- 
tual control over the Governor-General in Council 
in his legislative capacity, as his acts printed 
and published come under your revision. His 
executive authority as far as regards the internal 
government, will be subject to the control of the 
laws, and the due administration of the laws, will 
be secured by the courts appointed to administer 
them being rendered entirely distinct, both from 
the executive and legislative authority, at the 
same time that the conduct of the judges of the 
superior courts will be subject to the most vigilant 
control on the part of the executive power. 

The necessity of divesting the Governor-General 
in Council of the exercise of any judicial authority 
at some future period was foreseen at the first 
establishment of the present constitution. It will 
accordingly appear, that throughout the code of 
regulations the powers of the Sudder Dewanny 
Adawlut and the Nizamut Adawlut are so framed 
as to admit of these courts being at any time con- 
stituted in the manner now proposed. But the 
cautious spirit, which will be found to pervade every 
part of that constitution, wisely left these judicial 
powers to be exercised by the Governor-General 
in Council, until circumstances should dictate the 
necessity of his relinquishing them. 

The establishment of the new Courts of Sudder 
Dewanny Adawlut and Nizamut Adawlut pro- 
viding for the discharge of the judicial duties now 
exercised by the Governor-General in Council, the 
only point connected with the subject of this 
address which remains to be considered, is the 
permanent provision to be made for enabling the 
Governor-General in Council to execute the legis- 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1800 189 

lative and executive duties which are still to be 
performed by him. 

The duties of the Governor-General in Council 
in his legislative capacity, are first, the framing of 
such laws or regulations as may occur to him to be 
necessary for improving the internal government 
of the country. Secondly, the consideration of 
such laws or regulations as may be proposed to him 
by any of the Courts of Judicature, or other 
authorities empowered to propose regulations. 

In a despotic government the will of the ruling 
power stands in the place of law ; but when it 
becomes the fundamental principle of a govern- 
ment to be guided by written and defined laws, 
every cdse which occurs, for which no provision is 
made, and every defect discovered in the existing 
laws, calls for the interposition of the legislative 
authority. 

Numerous cases now demand that interposition ; 
but it is unavoidably withheld, from the various 
avocations of the Governor-General in Council, 
rendering it impossible to give his attention to the 
several cases, or defects, or to make the necessary 
legislative provisions for them. 

The superintendence of this important duty, on 
the due performance of which depend the happi- 
ness of the people, the extent of your resources, and 
the stability of your empire, will in future devolve 
chiefly on the new Court of Sudder Dewanny 
Adawlut and Nizamut. It will be the province of 
the Governor-General in Council to determine on 
the expediency of adopting the regulations which 
may be submitted to him by these courts, or by 
the other authorities empowered to propose 
regulations. 



190 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

The duties of the Governor-General in Council 
in his executive capacity consist of — first, his duties 
as exercising the executive authority of the govern- 
ment of the British possessions in India. Secondly, 
his duties as the chief representative of the Company 
in India, in their commercial capacity.' 

The first mentioned duties must be considered, 
as they relate to the conduct of the relations 
between the British power in India, and foreign 
states; and secondly, as they are connected with 
the internal government of your own possessions. 

The glorious termination of the late war in 
Mysore, and the events which preceded it, have 
not only widely extended your political relations, 
but have established the ascendancy of the British 
power over all the States of India. 

The maintenance of this ascendancy, necessarily 
demands the constant and vigilant attention of the 
Governor-General in Council. 

The public records afiord abundant testimony, 
how great a proportion of the time of the Governor- 
General in Council must necessarily be occupied by 
this most important duty. 

The executive duties of the Governor-General 
in Council, as connected with the internal govern- 
ment of the British possessions of Bengal, comprise 
the management of the public revenue, the super- 
intendence of the general finances of India, the 
regulations of the army, and the infinite variety of 
miscellaneous business which falls under the 
cognizance of the executive authority in every 
government. 

The general control exercised by the Governor- 
General in Council over the ci\^ and military 
affairs of the subordinate governments forms 



TO THE COURT OP DIRECTORS, 1800 191 

another important branch of these executive 
duties. 

The two subordinate governments may be con- 
sidered with relation to the supreme government 
as dependent states. The nature of the control 
exercised over those governments corresponds, 
in many material respects, with that exercised 
by the Crown, with regard to the American and 
West Indian possessions. 

It is essential that this control should be extended 
to all matters in any respect connected with the 
unity, strength and stability of the British power 
in India. 

The various questions arising out of the settle- 
ment of our recent conquests, of our connexion 
with the dependent power established in Mysore, 
and lastly, the introduction of the constitution of 
the internal government of Bengal into the British 
territories, subject to the governments of Fort St. 
George and Bombay, demand at present a more 
than ordinary attention of the Governor-General 
in Council, to the affairs of those governments. 

Another branch of the duties of the Governor- 
General in Council in his executive capacity is the 
superintendence of the subordinate settlements, 
and of our acquisitions from the French and the 
Dutch. 

Ab the chief representative of the Company in 
their commercial capacity the Governor-General 
in Council has the immediate superintendence of 
their commercial concerns in Bengal, and exercises 
a general control over the provision of the invest- 
ment at the other presidencies, including a con- 
siderable degree of attention to their affairs in 
China. 



192 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

The establishment attached to the Governor- 
General in Council in his legislative and executive 
capacity, for the conduct of these various and im- 
portant duties under circumstances peculiarly 
arduous and critical, has hitherto consisted of a 
secretary, and four sub-secretaries. The assistants 
under these officers are necessarily incompetent to 
afford them any effectual aid in their more im- 
portant duties. 

From the constitution of these offices of sub- 
secretary, these offices were not acceptable to 
persons of any pretensions in the respective 
departments, either from their rank in the service, 
or from their talents. They have accordingly for 
the most part been filled by junior servants, neces- 
sarily incompetent to afford any efficient assist- 
ance in the execution of the duties of government. 

It is of the greatest importance to the public 
interests, that the establishments of the several 
departments immediately connected with the 
legislative and executive capacity of the Governor- 
General in Council should be so constituted as to 
ensure at the head of the respective departments, 
the assistance of men of ability, integrity and 
experience, competent to the due conduct of the 
ordinary duties of the government. 

Establishments so constituted will form a great 
check to negligence or misrule ; at the same time 
that they will always be powerful instruments in 
the hands of those who are zealous in the promotion 
of the public interests. 

The Governor-General in Council therefore 
determined to make the situations of the public 
officers, who are to be his instruments for the 
conduct of the government of the British posses- 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1800 193 

sions in India, offices of high honour, and of the 
first emolument. 

This was the only mode of enabling the Governor- 
General in Council to command the services of men 
of the first talents and ability, in the respective 
departments. 

As connected with the principle of relieving the 
Governor-General in Council from all unnecessary 
labour of detail, our attention has been drawn to 
the number of papers which it has been the practice 
for the Governor-General in Council to attest with 
his own signature. Much of the time of the Gover- 
nor-General in Council is occupied unnecessarily 
in the signature of these papers, and the dispatch 
of the public business is often considerably impeded 
in obtaining his signature to them. 

We have accordingly determined, that all public 
papers shall be authenticated by the signature of 
the secretary to the department. From this 
general rule, however, we have of course excepted 
our addresses to your honourable Court, and to the 
subordinate Presidencies, and all other papers, to 
which considerations of respect to superior autho- 
rity, or other circumstances, may render it proper 
that the signatures of the Governor-General in 
Council should be affixed. Conformably to this 
determination, your honourable Court will find the 
sets of the public proceedings which are transmitted 
to you, attested by the secretaries of the respective 
departments, by order of the Governor-General in. 
Council, instead of being signed by the Governor- 
General and the members of Council. 

In this review of the constitution of the supreme 
government of the Company’s possessions in India, 
it could not escape the Governor-General in Council, 

231 K 



194 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

that the wisest system of government will but 
imperfectly answer its ends, unless means are at 
the same time taken for providing persons duly 
qualified for the conduct of the system. 

It would be useless to enter into any argument 
to prove that the same general qualifications 
necessary for the first political, judicial, financial 
and commercial stations in Europe, are equally 
requisite for the due discharge of the duties of 
similar situations in India. 

Your Honourable Court can yourselves form an 
adequate judgement how far your servants are in 
general competent to discharge these high offices. 
You know at what age they are sent from England, 
and what are at that period their qualifications 
for the office to which they are destined. You 
are also apprised how far the occupations on 
which the first years of their residence in India 
are employed, are calculated to give them these 
qualifications. 

Your servants are nominated to the highest 
stations of civil government, without any test of 
their possessing the requisite qualifications for the 
discharge of the functions of these offices. No such 
test could now indeed be required, none having 
been prescribed, and no means having been afforded 
to individuals of acquiring the necessary qualifica- 
tions for public stations. 

In consequence of this serious defect in the 
system of your government, it has been the 
practice to transfer your servants from one line of 
the service to another, with little regard to the 
qualifications for the offices for which they have 
been selected. No imputation attaches in this 
respect to your governments. Ajnong those from 



TO THE COURT OP DIRECTORS, 1800 195 

whom the selection was to be made, there could not 
possibly exist any material ground of preference. 

It is far from our intention in these observations 
to reflect on the general talents, character, or 
integrity of your servants on this establishment. 
Whatever may be their deficiencies, they are not 
ascribable to themselves, but to the nature of the 
service. Great exertions indeed have been made 
by individuals, and it affords matter of astonish- 
ment, that under such disadvantages they should 
have acquitted themselves with so much ability 
and success, in situations which in Europe are to be 
attained only by regular and systematic education 
and laborious exertions. 

It is obvious that an education exclusively 
European or Indian, would not qualify your 
servants for the situations which they are destined 
to fill. The foundation of their education must be 
laid in England, and it must be completed syste- 
matically after their arrival in India. 

The Governor-General in Council has, therefore, 
determined to found an establishment at this 
Presidency, of the nature of a collegiate institution, 
for the purpose of enabling the servants of the 
Company to perfect themselves in those acquire- 
ments, which form the necessary qualifications for 
the different lines of the service, in which they may 
choose to engage. It is our intention that the 
junior servants shall be attached to this institution 
for a certain period after their arrival, instead of 
being employed in the unprofitable occupation of 
transcribing papers, and abandoned to the dictates 
of their own discretion, both with regard to their 
morals and acquirements. 

An institution of this description will ensure a 



196 THE MARQUESS WELLESLEY 

succession ot men, equal to the support of the great 
interests of the Company, and of the British nation 
in India. 

The above observations with regard to the 
education and qualifications of your civil servants 
in Bengal for the conduct of civil government 
apply with equal force to your servants under the 
other Presidencies. Under our instructions to Fort 
St. George, of the 31st December last, and the 
orders which we have it in contemplation to issue 
to Bombay, the civil servants on those establish- 
ments will be shortly called upon to exercise the 
same important functions as the civil servants in 
Bengal. 

Whether it will be advisable to bring the junior 
servants attached to the establishments of Fort St. 
George and Bombay to Bengal in the first instance, 
in order to enable them to acquire the necessary 
qualifications here, or to found institutions for the 
purpose at those Presidencies, is a question which 
will demand further consideration. 

When the details of the plan of the intended 
institution shall have been arranged, we shall lose 
no time in forwarding it to your Honourable Court. 
As it cannot fail to redound equally to the honour 
and happiness of the civil servants, as well as to 
promote the solid and substantial interests of the 
Company, and of the nation, we feel the strongest 
conviction that it will meet with your approbation. 

Ab connected with the subject of fdrming the 
characters of your servants, we cannot omit to 
notice the state of your religious establishments in 
this country. 

The sentiments which have occurred to the 
Governor-General regarding these establishments, 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1800 197 

will hereafter form the subject of a separate address 
to your Honourable Court from his lordship. 

It is of the last importance to the stability of the 
British power in India, that these establishments 
should be placed on the most respectable footing. 
Such establishments will cherish in the minds of 
the servants of the Company a sense of moral duty, 
and teach those who fill important stations, that 
the great public duties, which they are called upon 
to execute in India, are not of a less sacred nature 
than the duties of similar situations in their own 
country. In proportion as persons holding such 
situations are brought to entertain these high and 
worthy notions of their functions, and to consider 
themselves as more especially accountable to that 
Being, whose instruments they are in the govern- 
ment of a large portion of the human race, in the 
same degree will they discharge their duties with 
zeal, diligence and integrity. 

We feel that it would not only be impolitic, but 
highly immoral to suppose that Providence has 
admitted of the establishment of the British power 
over the finest provinces of India, with any other 
view than that of its being conducive to the 
happiness of the people, as well as to our national 
advantage. 

In proportion as the policy and conduct of the 
British Government shall correspond with these 
beneficent intentions, we are persuaded that its 
power will acquire increasing stability. 

Impressed with a deep sense of the justice and 
wisdom of these principles, we are confident that 
it will always be equally for the interests of the 
Company, and of the British nation, that they 
should constitute the basis of the system of our 



198 THE MARQUESS OF HASTINGS 

Indian Government ; and that consistently with 
the considerations of a well regulated economy, 
we ought never to withhold that portion of the 
resources derived from these valuable possessions, 
which may be found indispensably necessary for 
dispensing to them the invaluable blessings of 
civil order and good government. 

We have the honour to be, &c., 

Wellesley and Council. 


1 8. The Marquess of Hastings to the Court of 
Directors, S February 1818 
Honourable Sirs, 

All essential operations (except in the State of 
Poona) being now terminated, and our arrange- 
ments having taken their destined shape, 1 do 
myself the honour of stating to you the general 
issue of the campaign. 

Matters had a different turn from that on which 
every probability authorized me to reckon, as soon 
as the treaty was signed by Dowlut Rao Scindiah. 
The engagements to which he subscribed were an 
acknowledgement of his inability to counteract 
the measures contemplated against the Pindarries ; 
and no other power appeared to have either 
inducement or means to support the banditti 
against the force which we had put into motion. 
No surmise existed of other ground of contest. 
The perfidious endeavours of the Peishwah to 
excite the native sovereigns against us were, indeed, 
known : but it did not seem natural that they 
should have made any impression ; far less could 
it be suspected that absolute obligations for co- 
operating with him had been plighted. 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1818 199 

From the above prospect, no result could ehter 
less into the speculations of your government, 
than that any advantage should be acquired for 
the Honourable Company, beyond the establish- 
ment of a pacific system in Central India. Though 
the undertaking this great object was imposed upon 
you by the duty of securing your subjects in future 
against such ravages as those which they had ex- 
perienced in two successive years, the suppression 
of a powerful body, professedly banded for the 
purpose of indiscriminate plunder, and which 
accompanied its rapine with acts of the most 
atrocious inhumanity, was in itself an enterprise 
becoming a British Government. That our motives 
might be thoroughly unequivocal, it was my anxious 
wish that the reputation of so laudable a service 
should alone remunerate the Honourable Company 
for the effort ; and, with a premature confidence, 
I took the liberty of expressing to you my joy at 
the likelihood of our accomplishing the end, with- 
out a particle of defalcation from the possessions of 
any native sovereign. If those hopes have been 
defeated, it will appear not to have been through 
any provocation on our part : and if addition shall 
be made to your territory, it will be seen that it is 
only through the imperious necessity of guarding 
against the speedy renewal of a treachery so rooted 
in its pature as to admit of no other prevention. 

The fear of losing the opportunity for distin- 
guishing his outset in arms with a show of suc- 
cess, added to the rancorous desire of murdering 
your minister who resided on the faith of treaties 
at His Highness’s court, induced the Peishwah 
to precipitate matters. On his taking the field 
earlier than his secret confederates expected, they 



200 THE MAKQUESS OF HASTINGS 

endeavoured to fulfil their compact, though they 
were by no means prepared. Holkar’s govern- 
ment immediately assembled troops, with the 
proclaimed design of supporting the Peishwah, 
and marched in the direction of Poona. The 
cbncourse to that standard was much greater 
than could have been expected ; notwithstanding 
which, Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Hislop 
manifested the most exemplary and generous 
patience, before he took the decision of dispersing 
that army by force. His Excellency was instructed 
by me to use every effort of conciliatory repre- 
sentation towards persuading Holkar’s Sirdars to 
abandon their hostile purpose ; but should that 
fail, he was directed to treat Holkar as an enemy. 
The moderation of Sir Thomas Hislop’s tone was 
construed by the opposite party as proceeding 
from an apprehension of their strength, and the 
most contemptuous insults were offered to our 
troops. The beating down this spirit for the present 
hour would be of little avail, if a disposition of 
such gratuitous enmity were not to be restricted 
in the means of its future indulgence ; but beyond 
this consideration, the displayed and professed 
obedience to the Peishwah’s summons, in breach 
of existing treaties, exacted strict precautions for 
our security. As everything which we restored to 
Holkar, and even the permission for his continuance 
on the Musnud, was a positive boon, we were 
thoroughly entitled to appropriate to the Honour- 
able Company, out of the conquered lands, a 
revenue sufficient to defray the charge of a force, 
the stationing of which in that quarter, the wanton 
hostility of Holkar’s government, had proved to be 
an indispensable provision for the future. 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1818 201 

The same Mahratta tie which acted so irresistibly 
upon Holkar’s court was as powerful with the 
Rajah of Nagpore. Our whole conduct towards 
him had been unvaried kindness ; nor had a single 
point of difference ever arisen in the political 
transactions between us. The extinction of the 
Pindarries, who annually plundered his territories, 
was an object of earnest desire to him. Yet while, 
with such antecedent reasons for mutual confidence, 
we were prosecuting that enterprise, he publicly 
received from the Peishwah (then in arms against 
us) a khelat with an honorary title, and issued 
private orders for the levy of troops in all quarters. 
On being solicited by the Resident to explain the 
assemblage of troops which was taking place round 
Nagpore, he with the basest deceit protested his 
inviolable amity, while he was equipping himself 
for a profligate outrage to the law of nations, in an 
attack on our accredited minister at his court. 
Subsequent events irrefragably proved that no 
reliance could be placed on him or his people. The 
option for us was, to leave him with the tempta- 
tion and the means of fashioning his preparations 
better for another opportunity, or to bind him to 
tranquillity by diminishing his resources, and 
thereby forbidding his hopes of success. The sub- 
version of all the beneficial changes which we have 
been effecting would have been the early and least 
injurious consequence of the former branch of 
the alternative. There was, in truth, no choice. 
Simple self-defence required us to retain the dis- 
tricts which we had subdued by the action at 
Jubbulpore, and to maintain in them an advanced 
force as a permanent cu^b on Nagpore. To these 
must be added the territory of Saugor. The 
H3 



202 THE MAI^QUESS OF HASTINGS 

sovereignty over that possession was transferred 
to the Honourable Company by the treaty of 
Poona ; but Benaick Row, the manager of Saugor, 
in violation of his allegiance, has not only screened 
the Pindarries, but permitted the public levy of 
men in the town of Saugor for the Rajah of Nag- 
pore, after that prince had put himself into a state 
of open war with us, by the attacks on the British 
Resident on the 26th and 27th of November. 

The conduct of Nana Govind Row, the other 
claimant on Saugor, though not openly hostile, 
had been such as to justify our proceeding against 
that district, without reference to his pretensions, 
further than as considerations of policy may 
suggest a partial attention to his interests. 

Whatsoever had been said relative to Holkar 
and the Rajah of Nagpore, will apply still more 
forcibly to the Peishwah. As the contest with him 
is not come to a termination, nothing but the. 
principle can be expressed. 

Scindia had not incurred forfeiture, though he 
has essentially deserved that penalty. I should 
say, that the very letter of the treaty has been 
observed to him with even too much strictness, if 
too much strictness of construction could be ob- 
served towards an unequal antagonist. His troops 
have, in no one instance, impeded the marches of 
the retreating Pindarries ; much less have they 
contributed any co-operation with us : and his 
contingent of horse has been withheld under various 
pretences, until it was no longer of any conse- 
quence. Relying on our respect for the obligations 
of forbearance which the treaty imposed on us, he 
has hardly disguised that he was watching the 
course of the Peishwah’s affairs, and projected the 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1818 203 

adoption of measures consonant to any encourage- 
ment they might hold out. It is beyond question, 
that Holkar’s taking the field would have been 
sufficient to decide him, had I not come so rapidly 
back upon him. From our proximity he knew, 
that should he stir, I could be upon him, before it 
would be practicable for him to get his artillery 
through the passes of the hills which separate the 
province of Gwalior from the southern districts ; 
he would, therefore, be driven to choose, whether 
he would shut himself up in his fortress of Gwalior 
with his ordnance, or, leaving it there, betake 
himself, without artillery, acrpss the ridge. In 
either case, Gwalior would have been masked with 
a small entrenched camp, while the occupation of 
the passes over the hills left the territory behind to 
be reduced at leisure ; and Ameer Khan, with his 
troops, would have been summoned to take 
possession of the southern tracts under the pro- 
tection of our divisions. This Scindia doubtless 
foresaw, and has escaped : but, though he will still 
benefit highly by our restitution to him of lands 
which were held by the Pindarries, he has no 
claim on our liberality. Those disorders of state 
which we might have helped him to regulate, and 
those financial difficulties which we might have 
smoothed for him, will press him with augmented 
force, now that we have deprived him of extra- 
neous resources, and his government will probably 
soon fall to pieces. Should that not happen, a 
salutary caution against tolerating hereafter any 
predatory combinations within his dominions, 
will have been impressed upon him by the chastise- 
ment which Jeswunt Rao Bhow has received. 
That officer commanded a separate army of 



204 THE MARQUESS OF HASTINGS 

Scindia’s at Jawud. In contempt of the orders 
publicly delivered to him on the part of Scindia, he 
not only furnished provisions, and every facilita- 
tion of progress, to the body of Pindarries re- 
treating under Cheetoo, but he gave to that chief 
intelligence of the approach of the British troops, 
and saved him from being cut off. Our forbearance 
overlooked this direct hostility : but when we 
found his practices were continued, in despite of 
every remonstrance from the officer stationed to 
superintend his conduct, when we learned that he 
protected Pindarries and their property in his 
camp, under the very eye of that officer ; when 
we discovered that, in violation of the treaty, he 
privately enrolled the troops which seceded from 
Holkar’s army, it became necessary to take up the 
matter seriously. Major-General Brown, detached 
with a corps from this division, was ordered to 
require the surrender of the Pindarries, and of two 
Sirdars by whom they had been more immediately 
sheltered. On information that, under the con- 
nivance of the Bhow, the two Sirdars with the 
bodies of horse belonging to them were about to 
quit the place, carrying off the Pindarries, the 
Major-General dispatched a squadron of cavalry 
to get beyond the camp and prevent their flight, 
while he should renew representations to Jeswunt 
Rao. The object of this detachment being sus- 
pected, our cavalry were fired upon by the Bhow’s 
infantry, and four pieces of cannon were also 
opened upon them : an aggression which entailed 
the attack and dispersion of Jeswunt Rao’s army, 
as well as the capture of the town of Jawud. The 
occurrence has been fortunate ; because we could 
not but be sensible, that had the Bhow remained in 
possession of power, his force would have been a 



TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS, 1818 205 

rallying point for all the plunderers whom we had 
with such exertion scattered, so as that our inter- 
ference would have been demanded hereafter, when 
the moment might have been far less convenient. 

The exertions of the Nawab of Bhopaul in 
supplying with provisions our columns which 
advanced from the Nerbudda, in aiding towards 
the expulsion of the Pindarries, and in contributing 
eight hundred horse to the division of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Adams throughout the campaign, have 
been so meritorious that it is impossible to deny 
him the benefit of British protection. The events 
which have extended your possessions along the 
front of Bhopaul so totally extinguish the con- 
siderations influencing your objection to receiving 
it as a feudatory, that I think I cannot err in 
regarding the prohibition as no longer in force. It 
is a material barrier between Scindia and Nagpore 
on that side ; while Kota, Boondee, Kerowly, and 
Holkar’s possessions, restrict him along the 
Chumbul. Those minor states mentioned are 
countries of great natural strength, and would be 
vigorously defended, now that their rulers know 
themselves safe against the danger of ultimately 
succumbing. 

The Rajpoot rulers of Jodepore and Odeypore 
have by treaty constituted themselves your 
feudatories ; and the Vakeels from the Rajah of 
Jeypore are now at Delhi, arranging the terms on 
which that prince is to be admitted to the same 
relation. The smaller states to the westward will 
follow of course. 

The Honourable Secret Committee, looking 
forward to the necessity of contracting some such 
ties, enjoined that such eventual engagements 
should be restricted to what were distinctly 



206 THE MARQUESS OF HASTINGS 

indispensable towards the extirpation of the Pin- 
darries. The objections to an extension of them 
were obviously two : first the possible expense 
attending the provisions for fulfilling compacts 
of that nature ; secondly, their tendency to 
embroil us with other powers. Neither of those 
consequences are involved in the arrangements 
which occurrences recommended to my adoption. 
The States received as feudatory under the Honour- 
able Company’s protection will defray a con- 
siderable portion of military charge antecedently 
resting on your treasury ; and it will be visible 
to your Honourable Court, that Scindia, the only 
remaining sovereign who could have a difference 
with any of the governments in question, must 
experience the strongest of all dissuasions against 
aggression, from the very amount of those powers 
which we have confederated. I have thence 
construed the instructions as not applicable to 
circumstances so little analogous to what had been 
in the contemplation of the Honourable Committee 
or of myself. Events, altogether unexpected, 
presented a juncture which was to be dealt with 
according to its particular features. Believing that 
I have availed myself of it in the manner best 
calculated to ensure future tranquillity, I trust 
your Honourable Court will approve my procedure, 
when you consider the certainty that any state, 
not taken under your protection and guidance, 
must have afforded to Scindia’s detached Sirdars 
a field for rapine, and would, in its quest for 
means of self-preservation, have revived a predatory 
association, by the number of lawless adventurers 
which it would attract for its defence without 
having resources to pay their service. In such a 
case, an urgent policy must have forced us to an 



TO THE COURT OP DIRECTORS, 1818 207 

expensive interference, the simple pledge of which 
will now be sufficient to secure us against the call 
for its real exertion. 

That these complicated concerns have been 
settled in less than three months since the southern 
divisions crossed the Nerbudda (the actual open- 
ing of the campaign), is an advantage on which I 
beg leave sincerely to congratulate the Hbnourable 
Court. It has been usual to communicate to the 
Horse-Guards by an aide-de-camp the fortunate 
result of any considerable operation in which His 
Majesty’s troops have had a share, a brevet step 
being generally hoped for the individual charged 
with the intelligence. I assure myself that your 
Honourable Court will regard the present instance 
as one which stands exempted from the spirit of 
your interdict against sending officers to Europe 
with dispatches, and that you would wish Captain 
Stanhope (who has the honour of presenting this 
letter) to have the chance of benefiting by a 
practice devised to stimulate the activity of 
generals, through the interest they take in the 
persons composing their professional suite. How- 
soever void of claim to distinction has been the 
part which I have filled in the late transactions, 
the courtesy of the service may probably obtain for 
the aide-de-camp of the Commander-in-Chief a 
recognition of the success with which a military 
undertaking of no ordinary extent has been com- 
pleted. 

I have, &c. 

(Signed) Hastings. 

Camp at Kinjowlee, 

on the banks of the Sinde, 

8th February 1818. 



208 


LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 


19 . Lord William Bentinck on the Suppression 
of Sati, 8 November 1829 
Whether the question be to continue or to 
discontinue the practice of sati, the decision is 
equally surrounded by an awful responsibility. 
To consent to the consignment year after year of 
hundreds of innocent victims to a cruel and un- 
timely end, when the power exists of preventing 
it, is a predicament which no conscience can con- 
template without horror. But, on the other hand, 
if heretofore received ojunions are to be considered 
of any value, to put to hazard by a contrary course 
the very safety of the British Empire in India, and 
to extinguish at once all hopes of those great 
improvements — affecting the condition not of 
hundreds and thousands but of millions — which 
can only be expected from the continuance of our 
supremacy, is an alternative which even in the light 
of humanity itself may be considered as a still 
greater evil. It is upon this first and highest 
consideration alone, the good of mankind, that the 
tolerance of this inhuman and impious rite can in 
my opinion be justified on the part of the govern- 
ment of a civilized nation. While the solution of this 
question is apj^alling from the unparalleled mag- 
nitude of its possible results, the considerations 
belonging to it are such as to make even the stoutest 
mind distrust its decision. On the one side. 
Religion, Humanity, under the most appalling 
form, as well as vanity and ambition — in short, 
all the most powerful influences over the human 
heart — are arrayed to bias and mislead the judge- 
ment. On the other side, the sanction of countless 
ages, the example of all the Mussulman conquerors, 



THE SUPPRESSION OF SATI, 1829 209 

the unanimous concurrence in the same policy of 
our own most able rulers, together with the 
universal veneration of the people, seem authorita- 
tively to forbid, both to feeling and to reason, any 
interference in the exercise of their natural pre- 
rogative. In venturing to be the first to deviate 
from this practice it becomes me to show that 
nothing has been yielded to feeling, but that 
reason, and reason alone, has governed the decision. 

So far indeed from presuming to condemn the 
conduct of my predecessors, I am ready to say that 
in the same circumstances I should have acted as 
they have done. So far from being chargeable 
with political rashness, as this departure from an 
established policy might infer, I hope to be able so 
completely to prove the safety of the measures as 
even to render unnecessary any calculation of the 
degree of risk which for the attainment of so great 
a benefit might wisely and justly be incurred. So 
far also from being the sole champion of a great 
and dangerous innovation, I shall be able to prove 
that the vast preponderance of present authority 
has long been in favour of abolition. Past expe- 
rience indeed ought to prevent me, above all men, 
from coming lightly to so positive a conclusion. 
When Governor of Madras I saw in the mutiny of 
Vellore the dreadful consequences of a supposed 
violation of religious customs upon the minds of 
the native population and soldiery. I cannot forget 
that I was then the innocent victim of that unfortu- 
nate catastrophe ; and I might reasonably dread, 
when the responsibility would justly attach to me 
in the event of failure, a recurrence of the same 
fate. Prudence and self-interest would counsel me 
to tread in the footsteps of my predecessors. But in 



210 LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 

a case of such momentous importance to humanity 
and civilization that man must be reckless of all his 
present or future happiness who could listen to the 
dictates of so wicked and selfish a policy. With 
the firm undoubting Conviction entertained upon 
this question, I should be guilty of little short of 
the. crime of multiplied murder if I could hesitate 
in the performance of this solemn obligation. I 
have been already stung with this feeling. Every 
day’s delay adds a victim to the dreadful list, which 
might perhaps have been prevented by a more 
early submission of the present question. But 
during the whole of the present year much public 
agitation has been excited, and when discontent 
is abroad, when exaggerations of all kinds are 
busily circulated, and when the native army have 
been under a degree of alarm lest their allowances 
should suffer with that of their European officers, 
it would have been unwise to have given a handle 
to artful and designing enemies to disturb the 
public peace. The recent measures of Govern- 
ment for protecting the interests of the Sepoys 
against the late reduction of companies will have 
removed all apprehension of the intentions of 
Government ; and the consideration of this circum- 
stance having been the sole cause of hesitation 
on my part, I will now proceed, praying the 
blessing of God upon our counsels, to state the 
grounds upon which my opinion has been formed. 

We have now before us two reports of the 
Nizamat Adalat, with statements of satis in 1827 
and 1828, exhibiting a decrease of 54 in the latter 
year as compared with 1827, and a still greater 
proportion as compared with former years. If this 
diminution could be ascribed to any change of 



THE SUPPRESSION OP SATI, 1829 211 

opinion upon the question produced by the pro- 
gress of education or civilization the fact would be 
most satisfactory, and to disturb this sure though 
slow process of self-correction would be most 
impolitic and unwise. But I think it may be 
safely affirmed that, though in Calcutta truth may 
be said to have made a considerable advance 
among the higher orders, yet in respect to the 
population at large no change whatever has taken 
place, and that from these causes at least no hope 
of the abandonment of the rite can be rationally 
entertained. The decrease, if it be real, may be 
the result of less sickly seasons, as the increase in 
1824 and 1825 was of the greater prevalence of 
cholera. But it is probably in a greater measure 
due to the more open discouragement of the 
practice given by the greater part of the European 
functionaries in latter years, the effect of which 
would be to produce corresponding activity in the 
police officers, by which either the number would f 
be really diminished or would be made to appear 
so in the returns. 

It seems to be the very general opinion that our 
interference has hitherto done more harm than 
good by lending a sort of sanction to the ceremony, 
while it has undoubtedly tended to cripple the 
efforts of magistrates and others to prevent the 
practice. 

I think it will clearly appear from a perusal of 
the documents annexed to this Minute, and from 
the facts which I shall have to adduce, that the 
passive submission of the people to the influence 
and power beyond the law — which in fact and 
practically may be and is often exercised without 
opposition by every public officer — is so great that 



212 LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 

the suppression of the rite would be completely 
effected by a tacit sanction alone on the part of 
Government. This mode of extinguishing it has 
been recommended by many of those whose advice 
has been asked ; and no doubt this in several 
respects might be a preferable course, as being 
equally effectual while more silent, not exciting 
the alarm which might possibly come from a public 
enactment, and from which in case of failure it 
would be easy to retreat with less inconvenience and 
without any compromise of character. But this 
course is clearly not open to Government, bound 
by Parliament to rule by law and not by their 
good pleasure. Under the present position of the 
British Empire, moreover, it may be fairly doubted 
if any such underhand proceeding would be really 
good policy. When we had powerful neighbours 
and had greater reason to doubt our own security, 
expediency might recommend an indirect and 
more cautious proceeding, but now that we are 
supreme my opinion is decidedly in favour of an 
open, avowed, and general prohibition, resting 
altogether upon the moral goodness of the act and 
our power to enforce it ; and so decided is my 
feeling against any half measure that, were I not 
convinced of the safety of total abolition, I certainly 
should have advised the cessation of all inter- 
ference. 

Of all those who have given their advice against 
the abolition of the rite, and have described the ill 
effects likely to ensue from it, there is no one to 
whom I am disposed to pay greater deference than 
Mr. Horace Wilson. I purposely select his opinion 
because, independently of his vast knowledge of 
Oriental literature, it has fallen to his lot, as 



THE SUPPRESSION OF SATI, 1829 213 

secretary to the Hindu College, and possessing the 
general esteem both of the parents and of the 
youths, to have more confidential intercourse with 
natives of all classes than any man in India. 
While his opportunity of obtaining information has 
been great beyond all others, his talents and judge- 
ment enable him to form a just estimate of its 
value. I shall state the most forcible of his reasons, 
and how far I do and do not agree with him. 

1st. Mr, Wilson considers it to be a dangerous 
evasion of the real difficulties to attempt to prove 
that satis are not ‘ essentially a part of the Hindu 
religion I entirely agree in this opinion. The 
question is not what the rite is but what it is 
supposed to be, and I have no doubt that the 
conscientious belief of every order of Hindus, with 
few exceptions, regards it as sacred. 

2nd. Mr. Wilson thinks that the attempt to put 
down the practice will inspire extensive dis- 
satisfaction, I agree also in this opinion. He 
thinks that success will only be partial, which I 
doubt. He does not imagine that the promulgated 
prohibition will lead to any immediate and overt 
act of insubordination, but that affrays and much 
agitation of the public mind must ensue. But he 
conceives that, if once they suspect that it is the 
intention of the British Government to abandon 
this hitherto inviolate principle of allowing the 
most complete toleration in matters of religion, 
there will arise in the minds of all so deep a distrust 
of our ulterior designs that they will no longer be 
tractable to any arrangement intended for their 
improvement, and that the principle of a purer 
morality, as well as of a more virtuous and exalted 
rule of action, now actively inculcated by European 



214 LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 

education and knowledge, will receive a fatal 
check. I must acknowledge that a similar opinion 
as to the probable excitation of a deep distrust of 
our future intentions was mentioned to me in 
conversation by that enlightened native, Ram 
Mohun Roy, a warm advocate for the abolition of 
sati and of all other superstitions and corruptions 
engrafted on the Hindu religion, which he considers 
originally to have been a pure Deism. It was his 
opinion that the practice might be suppressed 
quietly and unobservedly by increasing the diffi- 
culties and by the indirect agency of the police. 
He apprehended that any public enactment would 
give rise to general apprehension, that the reason- 
ing would be, ‘ While the English were contending 
for power, they deemed it politic to allow universal 
toleration and to respect our religion, but having 
obtained the supremacy their first act is a violation 
of their profession, and the next will probably be, 
like the Muhammadan conquerors, to force ui)on 
us their own religion.’ 

Admitting, as I am always disposed to do, that 
much truth is contained in these remarks, but not 
at all assenting to the conclusions which, though 
not described, bear the most unfavourable import, 
I shall now inquire into the evil and the extent 
of danger which may practically result from this 
measure. 

It must be first observed that of the 463 satis 
occurring in the whole of the Presidency of Fort 
William, 420 took place in Bengal, Behar, and 
Orissa, or what is termed the Lower Provinces, and 
of these latter 287 in the Calcutta Division alone. 

It might be very difficult to make a stranger to 
India understand, much less believe, that in a 



THE SUPPRESSION OF SATI, 1829 215 

population of so many millions of people as the 
Calcutta Division includes., and the same may be 
said of all the Lower Provinces, so great is the 
want of courage and of vigour of character, and 
such the habitual submission of centuries, that 
insurrection or hostile opposition to the will of the 
ruling power may be affirmed to be an impossible 
danger. I speak of the population taken separately 
from the army, and I may add for the information 
of the stranger, and also in support of my assertion, 
that few of the natives of the Lower Provinces are 
to be found in our military ranks. I therefore at 
once deny the danger in toto in reference to this part 
of our territories, where the practice principally 
obtains. 

If, however, security was wanting against exten- 
sive popular tumult or revolution, 1 should say that 
the Permanent Settlement, which, though a failure 
in many other respects and in its most important 
essentials, has this great advantage at least, of 
having created a vast body of rich landed pro- 
prietors deeply interested in the continuance of the 
British Dominion and having complete command 
over the mass of the people ; and in respect to the 
apprehension of ulterior views, I cannot believe 
that it could last but for the moment. The same 
large proprietary body, connected for the most 
part with Calcutta, can have no fears of the kind, 
and through their interpretation of out intentions 
and that of their numerous dependants and agents, 
the public mind could not long remain in a state 
of deception. 

Were the scene of this sad destruction of human 
life laid in the Upper instead of the Lower Pro- 
vinces, in the midst of a bold and manly people, 



216 


LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 


I might speak with less confidence upon the ques- 
tion of safety. In these Provinces the satis 
amount to forty-three only upon a population of 
nearly twenty millions. It cannot be expected 
that any general feeling, where combination of any 
kind is so unusual, could be excited in defence of 
a rite in which so few participate, a rite also 
notoriously made too often subservient to views of 
personal interest on the part of the other members 
of the family. 

It is stated by Mr. Wilson that interference with 
infanticide and the capital punishment of Brah- 
mans offer a fallacious analogy with the prohibition 
now proposed. The distinction is not perceptible 
to my judgement. The former practice, though 
confined to particular families, is probably viewed 
as a religious custom ; and as for the latter, the 
necessity of the enactment proves the general 
existence of this exception, and it is impossible to 
conceive a more direct and open violation of their 
Shasters, or one more at variance with the general 
feelings of the Hindu population. To this day in 
all Hindu states the life of a Brahman is, I believe, 
still held sacred. 

But I have taken up too much time in giving 
my own opinion when those of the greatest ex- 
perience and highest official authority are upon our 
records. In the report of the Nizamat Adalat for 
1828, four out of five of the Judges recommended 
to the Governor-General in Council the immediate 
abolition of the practice, and attest its safety. The 
fifth Judge, though not opposed to the opinions of 
the rest of the Bench, did not feel then prepared 
to give his entire assent. In the report of this year 
the measure has come up with the unanimous 



THE SUPPRESSION OF SATI, 1829 217 

recommendation of the Court. The two Superin- 
tendents of Police for the Upper and Lower 
Provinces (Mr. Walter Ewer and Mr. Charles 
Harwell) have in the strongest terms expressed 
their opinion that the suppression might be 
effected without the least danger. The former 
officer has urged the measure upon the attention 
of Government in the most forcible manner. No 
documents exist to show the opinions of the public 
functionaries in the interior, but I am informed 
that nine-tenths are in favour of the abolition. 

How, again, are these opinions supported by 
practical experience ? 

Within the limits of the Supreme Court at 
Calcutta not a sati has taken place since the time 
of Sir J ohn Anstruther. 

In the Delhi territory Sir Charles Metcalfe never 
permitted a sati to be performed. 

In Jessore, one of the districts of the Calcutta 
Division, in 1824 there were 30 satis ; in 1825, 16 ; 
in 1826, 3 ; in 1827 and in 1828 there were none. 
To no other cause can this be assigned than to a 
power beyond the law exercised by the acting 
magistrate, against which, however, no public 
remonstrance was made. Mr. Pigou has since 
been appointed to Cuttack, and has pursued the 
same strong interference as in Jessore, but his 
course, although most humane, was properly 
arrested, as being illegal, by the Commissioners. 
Though the case of Jessore is, perhaps, one of the 
strongest examples of efficacious and unopposed 
interposition, I really believe that there are few 
districts in which the same arbitrary power is not 
exercised to prevent the practice. In the last 
work in the report of the Acting Commissioner 



218 LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 

(Mr. Smith) he states that in Ghazipur in the last 
year sixteen, and in the preceding year seven, satis 
had been prevented by the persuasions, or, rather, 
it should be said, by the threats, of the police. 

Innumerable cases of the same kind might be 
obtained from the public records. 

It is stated in the letter of the Collector of Gaya 
(Mr. Trotter), but upon what authority I have 
omitted to inquire, that the Peshwa (I presume be 
means the ex-Peshwa Baji Rao) would not allow 
the rite to be performed, and that in Tanjore it is 
equally interdicted. These facts, if true, would 
be positive proofs at least that no unanimity exists 
among the Hindus upon the point of religious 
obligation. 

Having made inquiries, also, how far satis are 
permitted in the European foreign settlements, I 
find from Dr, Carey that at Chinsurah no such 
sacrifices had ever been permitted by the Dutch 
Government. That within the limits of Chandar- 
nagar itself they were also prevented, but allowed 
to be performed in the British territories. The 
Danish Government of Serampur has not forbidden 
the rite, in conformity to the example of the British 
Government. 

It is a very important fact that, though repre- 
sentations have been made by the disappointed 
party to superior authority, it does not appear that 
a single instance of direct opposition to the execu- 
tion of the prohibitory orders of our civil func- 
tionaries has ever occurred. How, then, can it be 
reasonably feared that to the Government itself, 
from whom all authority is derived, and whose 
power is now universally considered to be irresis- 
tible, anything bearing the semblance of resistance 



THE SUPPRESSION OP SATI, 1829 219 

can be manifested ? Mr. Wilson also is of opinion 
that no immediate overt act of insubordina- 
tion would follow the publication of the edict. The 
Regulation of Government may be evaded, the 
police may be corrupted, but even here the price 
paid as hush money will operate as a penalty, 
indirectly forwarding the object of Government. 

I venture, then, to think it completely proved 
that from the native population nothing of exten- 
sive combination, or even of partial opposition, may 
be expected from the abolition. 

It is, however, a very different and much more 
important question how far the feelings of the 
native army might take alarm, how far the rite may 
be in general observance by them, and whether, 
as in the case of Vellore, designing persons might 
not make use of the circumstances either for the 
purpose of immediate revolt or of sowing the seeds 
of permanent disaffection. Reflecting upon the 
vast disproportion of numbers between our native 
and European troops, it was obvious that there 
might be in any general combination of the forces 
the greatest danger to the State, and it became 
necessary, therefore, to use every precaution to 
ascertain the impression likely to be made upon 
the minds of the native soldiery. 

Before I detail to Council the means I have 
taken to satisfy my mind upon this very important 
branch of the inquiry, I shall beg leave to advert 
to the name of Lord Hastings. It is impossible 
but that to his most humane, benevolent, and 
enlightened mind this practice must have been 
often the subject of deep and anxious meditation. 
It was consequently a circumstance of ill omen and 
some disappointment not to have found upon the 



220 


LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 


Records the valuable advice and direction of his 
long experience and wisdom. It is true that during 
the greater part of his administration he was 
engaged in war, when the introduction of such a 
measure would have been highly injudicious. To 
his successor, Lord Amherst, also, the same obstacle 
was opposed. I am, however, fortunate m possess- 
ing a letter from Lord Hastings to a friend in 
England upon satis, and from the following extract, 
dated 21 November 1823, I am induced to believe 
that, had he remained in India, this practice would 
long since have been suppressed : — 

The subject which you wish to discuss is one which 
must interest one’s feelings most deeply, but it is also one 
of extreme nicety when I mention that in one of the years 
during my administration of government in India about 
8oo widows sacrificed themselves within the Provinces 
comprised in the Presidency of Bengal, to which number 
I very much suspect that very many not notified to the 
magistrate should be added. I will hope to have credit for 
being acutely sensible to such an outrage against humanity. 
At the same time I was aware how much danger might 
attend the endeavouring to suppress forcibly a practice so 
rooted in the religious belief of the natives. No men of low 
caste are admitted into the ranks of the Bengal Army. 
Therefore the whole of that formidable body must be 
regarded as blindly partial to a custom which they consider 
equally referrible to family honour and to point of faith. 
To attempt the extinction of the horrid superstition without 
being supported in the procedure by a real concurrence on 
the part of the army would be distinctly jjerilous. I have 
no scruple to say that I did believe I could have carried 
with me the assent of the army towards such an object. 
That persuasion, however, arose from circumstances which 
gave me peculiar influence over the native troops. 

Lord Hastings left India in 1823. It is quite ' 
certain that the Government of that time were 
much more strongly impressed with the risk of the 
undertaking than is now very generally felt. It 



THE SUPPRESSION OP SATI, 1829 221 

would have been fortunate could this measure 
have proceeded under the auspices of that dis- 
tinguished nobleman, and that the State might 
have had the benefit of the influence which /un- 
doubtedly he possessed in a peculiar degree over 
the native troops. Since that period, however, six 
years have elapsed. Within the territories all has 
been peaceful and prosperous, while without, Ava 
and Bhartpur, to whom alone a strange sort of 
consequence was ascribed by public opinion, have 
been made to acknowledge our supremacy. In this 
interval experience has enlarged our knowledge, 
and has given us surer data upon which to dis- 
tinguish truth from illusion, and to ascertain the 
real circumstances of our position and power. It 
is upon these that the concurring opinion of the 
officers of the civil and military services at large 
having been founded, is entitled to our utmost 
confidence. 

I have the honour to lay before Council the copy 
of a circular addressed to forty-nine officers, 
pointed out to me by the Secretary to Grovernment 
in the Military Department as being from their 
judgement and experience the best enabled to 
appreciate the effect of the proposed measure upon 
the native army, together with their answers. For 
more easy reference, an abstract of each answer is 
annexed in a separate paper and classed with those 
to the same purport. 

It appears first that of those whose opinions are 
directly adverse to all interference whatever with 
the practice the number is only five ; secondly, of 
those who are favourable to abolition but averse 
to absolute and direct prohibition under the autho- 
rity of the Government, the number is twelve ; 



222 LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 

thirdly, of those who are favourable to abolition, 
to be effected by the indirect interference of 
magistrates and other public officers, the number is 
eight ; fourthly, of those who advocate the total 
immediate and public suppression of the practice, 
the number is twenty-four. 

It will be observed, also, of those who are against 
an open and direct prohibition, few entertain any 
fear of immediate danger. They refer to a distant 
and undefined evil. I can conceive the possibility 
of the expression of dissatisfaction and anger being 
immediately manifested upon this supposed attack 
on their religious usages, but the distant danger 
seems to me altogether groundless, provided that 
perfect respect continues to be paid to all their 
innocent rites and ceremonies, and provided also 
that a kind and considerate regard be continued 
to their worldly interests and comforts. 

I trust, therefore, that the Council will agree with 
me in the satisfactory nature of this statement, 
and that they will partake in the perfect confidence 
which it has given me of the expediency and safety 
of the abolition. 

In the answer of one of the military officers, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Todd, he has recommended 
that the tax on pilgrims should be simultaneously 
given up, for the purpose of affording an undoubted 
proof of our disinterestedness and of our desire to 
remove every obnoxious obstacle to the gratifica- 
tion of their religious duties. A very considerable 
revenue is raised from this head, but if it were to be 
the price of satisfaction and confidence to the 
Hindus and of the renewal of all distrust of our 
present and future intentions, the sacrifice might be 
a measure of good policy. The objections that 



THE SUPPRESSION OF SATI, 1829 223 

must be entertained by all to the principle of the 
tax, which in England has latterly excited very 
great reprobation, formed an additional motive 
for the inquiry. I enclose a copy of a circular 
letter addressed to different individuals at present 
in charge of the district where the tax is collected, 
or who have had opportunities, from their local 
knowledge, of forming a good judgement upon this 
question. It will be seen that opinions vary, but 
upon a review of the whole my conviction is that 
in connexion with the present measure it is inex- 
pedient to repeal the tax. It is a subject upon 
which I shall not neglect to bestow more attention 
than I have been able to do. An abstract of these 
opinions is annexed to this minute. 

I have now to submit for the consideration of 
Council the draft of a regulation enacting the 
abolition of satis. It is accompanied by a paper 
containing the remarks and suggestions of the 
Judges of the Nizamut Adalat. In this paper is 
repeated the unanimous opinion of the Court in 
favour of the proposed measure. The suggestions 
of the Nizamat Adalat are in some measure at 
variance with a principal object 1 had in view, of 
preventing collision between the parties to the sati 
and the officers of police. It is only in the previous 
processes, or during the actifal performance of the 
rite, when the feelings of all may be more or less 
roused to a high degree of excitement, that I 
apprehend the possibility of affray or of acts of 
violence through an indiscreet and injudicious exer- 
cise of authority. It seemed to me prudent, there- 
tore, that the police, in the first instance, should 
warn and advise, but not forcibly prohibit, and if 
the sati, in defiance of this notice, were performed, 



224 


LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 


that a report should be made to the magistrate, 
who would summon the parties and proceed as 
in any other case of crime. The Indian Court ap- 
pears to think these precautions unnecessary, and 
I hope they may be so, but in the beginning we 
cannot, I think, proceed with too much circum- 
spection. Upon the same principle, m order to 
guard against a too hasty or severe a sentence 
emanating from extreme zeal on the part of the 
local judge, I have proposed that the case should 
only be cognizable by the Commissioners of circuit. 
These are, however, questions which I should wish 
to see discussed in Council. The other recommenda- 
tions of the Court are well worthy of our adoption. 

I have now brought this paper to a close, and I 
think I have redeemed my pledge of not allowing, 
in the consideration of this question, passion or 
feeling to have any part. I trust it will appear 
that due weight has been given to all difficulties 
and objections, that facts have been stated with 
truth and impartiality, that the conclusion to 
which I have come is completely borne out both 
by reason and authority. It may be justly asserted 
that the Government in this act will only be follow- 
ing, not preceding, the tide of public opinion long 
flowing in this direction ; and when we have 
taken into consideration the experience and wisdom 
of that highest public tribunal, theNizamat Adalat, 
who, in unison with our wisest and ablest public 
functionaries, have been year after year almost 
soliciting the Government to pass this act, the 
moral and political responsibility of not abolishing 
this practice far surpasses, in my judgement, that 
of the opposite course. 

But discarding, as I have done, every inviting 



THE SUPPRESSION OF SATI, 1829 225 

appeal from sympathy and humanity, and having 
given my verdict, I may now be permitted to 
express the anxious feelings with which I desire 
the success of this measure. 

The first and primary object of my heart is the 
benefit of the Hindus. I know nothing so im- 
portant to the improvement of their future con- 
dition as the estalblishment of a purer morality, 
whatever their belief, and a more just conception 
of the will of God. The first step to this better 
understanding will be dissociation of religious belief 
and practice from blood and murder. They will 
then, when no longer under this brutalizing ex- 
citement, view with more calmness acknowledged 
truths. They will see that there can be no incon- 
sistency in the ways of Providence, that to the 
command received as divine by all races of men, 

* No innocent blood shall be spilt,’ there can be no 
exception ; and when they shall have been con- 
vinced of the error of this first and most criminal 
of their customs, may it not be hoped that others, 
which stand in the way of their improvement, may 
likewise pass away, and that, thus emancipated 
from those chains and shackles upon their minds 
and actions, they may no longer continue, as they 
have done, the slaves of every foreign conqueror, 
but that they may assume their first places among 
the great families of mankind ? I disown in these 
remarks, or in this measure, any view whatever to 
conversion to our own faith. I write and feel as a 
legislator for the Hindus, and as I believe many 
enlightened Hindus think and feel. 

Descending from these higher considerations, it 
cannot be a dishonest ambition that the Govern* 
ment of which I form a part should have the credit 

231 T 



226 


LORD WILLIAM BENTINCK 


of an act which is to wash out a foul stain upon 
British rule, and to stay the sacrifice of humanity 
and justice to a doubtful expediency ; and finally, 
as a branch of the general administration of the 
Empire, I may be permitted to feel deeply anxious 
that our course shall be in accordance with the 
noble example set to us by the British Government 
at home, and that the adaptation, when practicable 
to the circumstances of this vast Indian population, 
of the same enlightened principles, may promote 
here as well as there the general prosperity, and 
may exalt the character of our nation. 

W. C. Bentinck. 

November 8th, 1829. 

20 . Tlionias Babington Macaulay, House of 
Commons, 10 July 1833 

Having, while this measure was in preparation, 
enjoyed the fullest and kindest confidence of my 
right hon. friend, agreeing with him completely 
in all those views which on a former occasion he 
so luminously and eloquently developed, having 
shared his anxieties, and feeling that, in some 
degree, I share his responsibility, I am naturally 
desirous to obtain the attention of the House while 
I attempt to defend the principles of this Bill. I 
wish that I could promise to be very brief ; but 
the subject is so extensive that I will only promise 
to condense what I have to say as much as I can. 

I rejoice, sir, that I am completely dispensed, by 
the turn which our debates have taken, from the 
necessity of saying anything in favour of one part 
of our measure — the opening of the China trade. 
No voice, I believe, has yet been raised in Parlia- 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 227 

ment to support the monopoly. On that subject 
all public men of all parties seem to be agreed. 
The resolution proposed by the Ministers has 
received the unanimous assent of both Houses, 
and the approbation of the whole kingdom. I will 
not, therefore, sir, detain the House by vindicating 
a measure which no gentleman has yet ventured 
to attack, but will proceed to call your attention 
to those effects which this great commercial 
revolution necessarily produced on the system of 
Indian government and finance. 

The China trade is to be opened : reason requires 
this — public opinion requires it. The government 
of the Duke of Wellington felt the necessity as 
strongly as the government of Lord Grey. No 
Minister, Whig or Tory, could have been found to 
propose a renewal of the monopoly ; no parliament, 
reformed or unreformed, would have listened to 
such a proposal. — But though the opening of the 
trade was a matter concerning which the public 
had long made up its mind, the political conse- 
quences which necessarily follow from the opening 
of the trade, seem to me to be even now little 
understood. The language which I have heard in 
almost every circle where the subject was discussed 
was this : ‘ Take away the monopoly, and leave 
the government of India to the Company ’ : a very 
short and convenient way of settling one of the 
most complicated ^estions that ever a legislature 
had to consider. The hon. member for Sheffield, 
though not disposed to retain the Company as an 
organ of government, has repeatedly used language 
which proves that he shares^ in the general miscon- 
ception. The fact is, that the abolition of the 
monopoly rendered it absolutely necessary to 



22S THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

make a fundamental change in the constitution 
of that great corporation. 

The C^ompariy had united in itself two characters : 
the character of the trader, and the character of 
sovereign. Between the trader and the sovereign 
there was a long and complicated account, almost 
every item of which furnished matter for litigation. 
While the monopoly continued, indeed, litigation 
was averted. The effect of the monopoly was, to 
satisfy the claims both of commerce and of terri- 
tory, at the expense of a third party — the English 
people ; to secure on the one hand funds for the 
dividend of the stockholder, and on the other hand 
funds for the government of the Indian empire by 
means of a heavy tax on the tea consumed in this 
country. But when the third party would no 
longer bear this charge, all the great financial 
questions which had, at the cost of that third party, 
been kept in abeyance, were opened in an instant. 
The connexion between the Company in its mer- 
cantile capacity, and the same Company in its 
political capacity was dissolved. The sovereign 
and the trader, from partners, became litigants. 
Even if the Company were permitted, as had been 
suggested, to govern India, and at the same time 
to trade with China, it would make no advances 
from the profits of its Chinese trade for the support 
of its Indian government. It was in consideration 
of its exclusive privilege, that it had hitherto 
been required to make those advances ; — ^it was 
by the exclusive privilege that it had been enabled 
to make them. When that privilege was taken 
away, it would be unreasonable in the legislature 
to impose such an obligation, and impossible for 
the Company to fulfil it. The whole system of 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 229 

loans from commerce to territory, and repayments 
from territory to commerce must cease. Each 
party must rest altogether on its own resources. 
It was, therefore, absolutely necessary to ascertain 
what resources each party possessed, to bring the 
long and intricate account between them to a close, 
and to assign to each a fair portion of assets and 
liabilities. There was vast property. How much 
of that property was applicable to purposes of 
state ? How much was applicable to a dividend ? 
There were debts to the amount of many millions. 
Which of these were the debts of the government 
that ruled at Calcutta ? Which of the great 
mercantile house that bought tea at Canton ? 
Were the creditors to look to the land revenues of 
India for their money ; or were they entitled to 
put executions into the warehouses behind Bishops- 
gate-street ? 

There were two ways of settling these questions 
— adjudication and compromise. The difficulties 
of adjudication were great — I think insuperable. 
Whatever acuteness and diligence could do, has 
been done. One person in particular whose talents 
and industry peculiarly fitted him for such investi- 
gations, and of whom I can never think without 
regret, Mr. Villiers, devoted himself to the examina- 
tion with an ardour and a perseverance which, 
I believe, shortened a life most valuable to his 
country and to his friends. The assistance of the 
most skilful accountants has been called in. But 
the difficulties are such as no accountant, how- 
ever skilful, could possibly remove. The difficulties 
are not arithmetical, but political. They arise from 
the constitution of the Company, from the long 
and intimate union of the commercial and imperial 



230 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

characters in one body. Suppose that a gentleman 
who is the treasurer of a charity, were to mix up 
the money which he receives on account of the 
charity with his own private rents and dividends, 
to pay the whole into his bank to his own private 
account, to draw it out again by cheques in exactly 
the same form when he wants it for his own private 
expenses, and when he wants it for the purposes 
of his public trust. Suppose that he were to 
continue to act thus till he was himself ignorant 
whether he were in advance or in arrear ; and 
suppose that many years after his death a question 
were to arise whether his estate were in debt to the 
charity or the charity in debt to his estate. Such 
is the question which is now before us — ^with 
this important difference : that the accounts of an 
individual could not be in such a state unless he 
had been guilty of fraud, or of that crassa negli- 
gentia which is scarcely less culpable than fraud, 
and that the accounts of the Company were 
brought into this state by circumstances of a very 
peculiar kind — by circumstances unparalleled in 
the history of the world. 

It is a mistake to suppose that the Company was 
a merely commercial body till the middle of the 
last century. Commerce was its object ; but in 
order to enable it to pursue that object, it had 
been, like the other Indian Companies which were 
its rivals, like the Dutch India Company, like the 
French India Company, invested from a very early 
period with political functions. More than 120 
years ago, it was in miniature precisely what it 
now is. It was intrusted with the very highest 
prerogatives of sovereignty. It had its forts and 
its white captains, and its black sepoys — ^it had its 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 231 

civil and criminal tribunals — ^it was authorized to 
proclaim martial law — ^it sent ambassadors to the 
native governments, and concluded treaties with 
them — ^it was zemindar of several districts, and 
within those districts, like other zemindars of the 
first class, it exercised the powers of a sovereign, 
even to the infliction of capital punishment on the 
Hindoos within its jurisdiction. It is incorrect, 
therefore, to say, that the Company was at first a 
mere trader, and has since become a sovereign. It 
was at first a great trader and a petty prince. Its 
political functions at first attracted little notice, be- 
cause they were merely auxiliary to its commercial 
functions. Soon, however, they became more and 
more important. The zemindar became a great 
nabob, became sovereign of all India — ^the 200 
sepoys became 200,000. This change was gradually 
wrought, and was not immediately comprehended. 
It was natural, that while the political functions 
of the Company were merely auxiliary to its com- 
merce, its political accounts should be mixed up 
with its commercial accounts. It was equally 
natural, that when once this mode of keeping 
accounts had been commenced, it should go on ; 
and the more so, as the change in the situation of 
the Company, though rapid, was not sudden. It 
is impossible to fix on any one day, or any one 
year, as the day or the year when the Company 
became a great potentate. It has been the fashion 
to fix on the year 1765, the year in which the 
Company received from the Mogul a commission 
authorizing them to administer the revenues of 
Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa, as the precise date of 
their sovereignty. I am utterly at a loss to under- 
stand why this period should be selected. Long 



232 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

before 1765 the Company had the reality of political 
power. Long before that year, they made a nabob 
of Arcot ; they made and unmade nabobs of 
Bengal ; they humbled the vizier of Oude ; they 
braved the emperor of Hindoostan himself. More 
than half the revenues of Bengal, as Lord Clive 
stated, were under one pretence or another ad- 
ministered by them. And after the grant, the 
Company was not, in form and name, an indepen- 
dent power. It was merely a minister of the court 
of Delhi. Its coinage bore the name of Shah Alum. 
The inscription which, till the time of Lord Hast- 
ings, appeared on the seal of the Governor-General 
declared that great functionary to be the slave of 
the Mogul. Even to this day, we have never 
formally deposed the king of Delhi. The Company 
contents itself with being Mayor of the palace, 
while the mi faineant is suffered to play at being 
a sovereign. In fact, it was considered, both by 
Lord Clive, and by Warren Hastings, as a point of 
policy to leave the character of the Company thus 
undefined, in order that the English might treat 
the princes in whose names they governed as 
realities or nonentities, just as might be most 
convenient. . . . 

In a pecuniary point of view, therefore, I con- 
ceive that we can defend the measure as it affects 
the territory. But to the territory, the pecuniary 
question is of secondary importance. If we have 
made a good pecuniary bargain for India, but a 
bad political bargain — ^if we have saved three or 
four millions to the finances of that country, and 
given to it, at the same time, pernicious institu- 
tions, we shall, indeed, have been practising a most 
ruinous parsimony. If, on the other hand, it shall 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 233 

be found that we have added fifty or a hundred 
thousand pounds a year to the expenditure of an 
empire which yields a revenue of twenty millions, 
but that we have at the same time secured to that 
empire, as far as in us lies, the blessings of good 
government, we shall have no reason to be ashamed 
of our profusion. I hope and believe that India 
will have to pay nothing. But on the most un- 
favourable supposition that can be made, she will 
not have to pay so much to the Company, as she 
now pays annually to a single state pageant — ^to 
the titular Nabob of Bengal, for example, or the 
titular King of Delhi. What she pays to the 
nominal princes, who, while they did anything, 
did mischief, and who now do nothing, she may 
well submit to pay to her real rulers, if she receives 
from them, in return, efficient protection, and good 
legislation. 

We come then to the great question. Is it 
desirable to retain the Company as an organ of 
government for India ? I think that it is desirable. 
The question is, I acknowledge, beset with difficul- 
ties. We have to solve one of the hardest problems 
in politics. We are trying to make brick without 
straw — to bring a clean thing out of an unclean — 
to give a good government to a people to whom we 
cannot give a free government. In this country — 
in any neighbouring country — it is easy to frame 
securities against oppression. In Europe, you have 
the materials of good government everywhere 
ready to your hands. The people are everywhere 
perfectly competent to hold some share, — not in 
every country an equal share — but some share of 
political power. If the question were, what is the 
best mode of securing good government in Europe, 
13 



234 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

the merest smatterer in politics would answer — 
representative institutions. In India, you cannot 
have representative institutions. Of all the in- 
numerable speculators who have ofEered their 
suggestions on Indian politics, not a single one, as 
far as I know, however democratical his opinions 
may be, has ever maintained the possibility of 
giving, at the present time, such institutions to 
India. One gentleman, extremely well acquainted 
with the affairs of our eastern empire, a most 
valuable servant of the Company, and the author 
of a History of India, which, though certainly not 
free from faults, is, I think, on the whole, the 
greatest historical work which has appeared in our 
language since that of Gibbon — I mean Mr. Mill — 
was examined on this point. That gentleman is 
well known to be a very bold and uncompromis- 
ing politician. He has written strongly — far too 
strongly, I think — in favour of pure democracy. 
He has gone so far as to maintain, that no nation 
which has not a representative legislature, chosen 
by universal suffrage, enjoys security against 
oppression. But when he was asked before the 
committee of last year, whether he thought repre- 
sentative government practicable in India, his 
answer was — ‘ utterly out of the question ’. This, 
then, is the state in which we are. We have to 
frame a good government for a country into which, 
by universal acknowledgement, we cannot introduce 
those institutions which all our habits — which all 
the reasonings of European philosophers — which all 
the history of our own part of the world would lead 
us to consider as the one great security for good 
government. We have to engraft on despotism 
those blessings which are the natural fruits of 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 235 

r 

liberty. In these circumstances, sir, it behoves us 
to be cautious, even to the verge of timidity. The 
light of political science and of history are with- 
drawn — we are walking in daifkness — we do not 
distinctly see whither we are going. It is the 
wisdom of a man, so situated, to feel his way, and 
not to plant his foot till he is well assured that the 
ground before him is firm. 

Some things, however, in the midst of this 
obscurity, I can see with clearness. I can see, for 
example, that it is desirable that the authority 
exercised in this country over the Indian govern- 
ment should be divided between two bodies — 
between a minister or a board appointed by the 
Crown, and some other body independent of the 
Crown. If India is to be a dependency of England 
— to be at war with our enemies — to be at peace 
with our allies — to be protected by the English 
navy from maritime aggression — to have a portion 
of the English army mixed with its sepoys — ^it 
plainly follows, that the king, to whom the con- 
stitution gives the direction of foreign affairs, and 
the command of the military and naval forces, 
ought to have a share in the direction of the Indian 
government. Yet, on the other hand, that a 
revenue of twenty millions a year — an army of two 
hundred thousand men — a civil service abounding 
with lucrative situations — should be left to the 
disposal of the Crown without any check whatever, 
is what no minister, I conceive, would venture to 
propose. This House is indeed the check provided 
by the constitution on the abuse of the royal 
prerogative. But that this House is, or is likely 
ever to be, an efiicient check on abuses practised 
in India, I altogether deny. We have, as I believe 



236 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

we all feel, quite business enough. If we were to 
undertake the task of looking into Indian affairs 
as we look into British affairs — if we were to have 
Indian budgets and Indian estimates — ^if we were 
to go into the Indian currency question and the 
Indian Bank Charter — ^if to our disputes about 
Belgium and Holland, Don Pedro and Don Miguel, 
were to be added disputes about the debts of the 
Guicowar and the disorders of Mysbre, the ex-king 
of the Afghans and the Maharajah Runjeet Sing — 
if we were to have one night occupied by the em- 
bezzlements of the Benares mint, and another by 
the panic in the Calcutta money-market — if the 
questions of suttee or no suttee, pilgrim tax or 
no pilgrim tax, ryotwary or zemindary, half batta 
or whole batta, were to be debated at the same 
length at which we have debated church reform and 
the assessed taxes, twenty-four hours a day and 
three hundred and sixty-five days a year would be 
too short a time for the discharge of our duties. 
The House, it is plain, has not the necessary time 
to settle these matters ; nor has it the necessary 
knowledge, nor has it motives to acquire that 
knowledge. The late change in its constitution 
has made it, I believe, a much more faithful repre- 
sentation of the English people. But it is far 
as ever from being a representation of the Indian 
people. A broken head in Cold Bath Fields 
produces a greater sensation among us than three 
pitched battles in India. A few weeks ago we had 
to decide on a claim brought by an individual 
against the revenue of India. If it had been an 
English question the walls would scarcely have 
held the members who would have flocked to the 
division. It was an Indian question ; and we 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 237 

could scarcely by dint of supplication make a 
House, Even when my right hon. friend, the 
President of the Board of Control, made his most 
able and interesting statement of the measures 
which he intended to propose for the government 
of a hundred millions of human beings, the atten- 
dance was not so large as I have seen it on 
a turnpike-bill or a rail-road bill. 

I then take these things as proved, that the 
Crown must have a certain authority over India, 
that there must be an efficient check on the autho- 
rity of the Crown, and that the House of Commons 
is not an efficient check. We must then find some 
other body to perform that important office. We 
have such a body — the Company. Shall we dis- 
card it ? 

It is true, that the power of the Company is an 
anomaly in politics. It is strange — very strange — 
thkt a joint-stock society of traders — a society the 
shares of which are daily passed from hand to hand 
— a society, the component parts of which are 
perpetually changing — a society, which, judging a 
priori f from its constitution, we should have said 
was as little fitted for imperial functions as the 
Merchant Tailors’ Company or the New Eiver Com- 
pany — should be intrusted with the sovereignty 
of a larger population, the disposal of a larger clear 
revenue, the command of a larger army, than are 
under the direct management of the executive 
government of the United Kingdom. But what 
constitution can we give to our Indian Empire 
which shall not be strange — which shall not be 
anomalous ? That Empire is itself the strangest 
of all political anomalies. That a handful of 
adventurers from an island in the Atlantic should 



238 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

have subjugated a vast country divided from the 
place of their birth by half the globe — a country 
which at no very distant period was merely the 
subject of fable to the nations of Europe — a 
country never before violated by the most re- 
nowned of Western conquerors — a country which 
Trajan never entered— a country lying beyond the 
point where the phalanx of Alexander refused to 
proceed ; — that we should govern a territory 
10,000 miles from us — a territory larger and more 
populous than France, Spain, Italy, and Germany 
put together — a territory the present clear revenue 
of which exceeds the present clear revenue of any 
state in the world, France excepted — a territory 
inhabited by men differing from us in race, colour, 
language, manners, morals, religion ; — ^these are 
prodigies to which the world has seen nothing 
similar. Reason is confounded. We interrogate 
the past in vain. General rules are almost useless 
where the whole is one vast exception. The Com- 
pany is an anomaly ; but it is part of a system 
where ever 5 rthing is anomaly. It is the strangest 
of all governments : but it is designed for the 
strangest of all Empires. 

If we discard the Company, we must find a 
substitute : and, take what substitute we may, 
we shall find ourselves unable to give any reason 
for believing that the body which we have put in 
the room of the Company is likely to acquit itself 
of its duties better than the Company. Commis- 
sioners appointed by the King during pleasure 
would be no check on the Crown ; Commissioners 
appointed by the King or by Parliament for life 
would always be appointed by the political party 
which might be uppermost, and if a change of 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 239 

administration took place, would harass the new 
government with the most vexatious opposition. 
The plan suggested by the right honourable gentle- 
man the member for Montgomeryshire, is I think 
the very worst that I have ever heard. He would 
have Directors nominated every four years by 
the Crown. Is it not plain that these Directors 
would always be appointed from among the sup- 
porters of the Ministry for the time being — ^that 
their situations would depend on the permanence 
of that Ministry — ^that therefore all their power 
and patronage would be employed for the purpose 
of propping that Ministry, and, in case of a change, 
for the purpose of molesting those who might 
succeed to power — that they would be subservient 
while their friends were in, and factious when 
their friends were out ? How would Lord Grey^s 
Ministry have been situated if the whole body of 
Directors had been nominated by the Duke of 
Wellington in 1830 ? I mean no imputation on 
the Duke of Wellington. If the present Ministers 
had to nominate Directors for four years, they 
would, I have no doubt, nominate men who would 
give no small trouble to the Duke of Wellington if 
he were to return to office. What we want is a 
body independent of the government, and no more 
than independent — ^not a tool of the treasury — not 
a tool of the opposition. No new plan which I 
have heard proposed would give us such a body. 
The Company, strange as its constitution may be, 
is such a body. It is, as a corporation, neither 
Whig nor Tory, neither high-church, nor low- 
church. It cannot be charged with having been 
for or against the Catholic Bill, for or against the 
Reform Bill. It has constantly acted with a view, 



240 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

Bot to English politics but to Indian politics. We 
have seen the country convulsed by faction. We 
have seen Ministers driven from office by this 
House — Parliament dissolved in anger — general 
elections of unprecedented turbulence — debates of 
unprecedented interest. We have seen the two 
branches of the legislature placed in direct opposi- 
tion to each other. We have seen the advisers of 
the Crown dismissed one day, and brought back 
the next day on the shoulders of the people. And 
amidst all these agitating events the Company has 
preserved strict and unsuspected neutrality. This 
is, I think, an inestimable advantage ; and it is an 
advantage which we must altogether forgo, if we 
consent to adopt any of the schemes which I have 
heard proposed on the other side of the House. 

We must judge of the Indian government, as of 
all other governments, by its practical effects. 
According to the hon. member for Sheffield, India 
is ill governed ; and the whole fault is with the 
Company. Innumerable accusations, great and 
small, are brought by him against their adminis- 
tration. They are fond of war. They are fond of 
dominion. The taxation is burthensome. The laws 
are undigested. The roads are rough. The post 
goes on foot. And for everything the Company is 
answerable. From the dethronement of the Mogul 
princes to the mishaps of Sir Charles Metcalfe’s 
courier, every disaster that has taken place in the 
East during sixty years is laid to the charge of this 
unfortunate corporation. And the inference is, 
that all the power which they possess ought to be 
taken out of their hands, and transferred at once 
to the Crown. 

Now, sir, it seems to me that for all the evils 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 241 

which the honourable gentleman has so pathetically 
recounted, the Ministers of the Crown are as much 
to blame as the Company— nay much more so. 
For the Board of Control could, without the consent 
of the Directors, have redressed those evils : and 
the Directors most certainly could not have re- 
dressed them without the consent of the Board of 
Control. Take the case of that frightful grievance 
which seems to have made the deepest impression 
on the mind of the hon. gentleman — the slowness 
of the mail. Why, sir, if my right hon. friend, the 
President of our Board, thought fit, he might 
direct me to write to the Court and require- them 
to frame a dispatch on that subject. If the Court 
disobeyed, he might himself frame a dispatch 
ordering Lord William Bentinck to put the dawks 
all over Bengal on horseback. If the Court refused 
to send out this dispatch, the Board could apply 
to the King’s Bench for a mandamus. If, on the 
other hand, the Directors wished to accelerate the 
journeys of the mail, and the Board were adverse 
to the project, the Directors could do nothing at 
all. For all measures of internal policy the servants 
of the King are at least as deeply responsible as the 
Company. For all measures of foreign policy the ser- 
vants of the King, and they alone, are responsible- 
I was surprised to hear the hon. gentleman accuse 
the Directors of insatiable ambition and rapacity, 
when he must know that no act of aggression on 
any native state can be committed by the Company 
without the sanction of the Board, and that in fact, 
the Board has repeatedly approved of warlike 
measures, which were strenuously opposed by the 
Company. He must know, in particular, that, 
during the energetic and splendid administration 



242 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

of the Marquess Wellesley, the Company was all 
for peace, and the Board all for conquest. If a line 
of conduct which the hon. gentleman thinks un- 
justifiable, has been followed by the Ministers of 
the Crown in spite of the remonstrances of the 
Directors, this is surely. a strange reason for turning 
off the Directors, and giving the whole power 
unchecked to the Crown. 

The hon. member t'ells us that India, under the 
present system, is not so rich and flourishing as 
she was 200 years ago. Really, sir, I doubt whether 
we are in possession of sufficient data to enable us 
to form a j udgement on that point. But the matter 
is of little importance. We ought to compare India 
under our Government, not with India under Acbar 
and his immediate successors, but with India as we 
found it. The calamities through which that 
country passed during the interval between the fall 
of the Mogul power and the establishment of the 
English supremacy were sufficient to throw the 
people back whole centuries. It would surely be 
unjust to say, that Alfred was a bad king because 
Britain, under his government, was not so rich or 
so civilized as in the time of the Romans. 

In what state, then, did we find India ? And 
what have we made India V We found society 
throughout that vast country in a state to which 
history scarcely furnished a parallel. The nearest 
parallel would perhaps be the state of Europe 
during the fifth century. The Mogul empire in the 
time of the successors of Aurungzebe, like the 
Roman empire in the time of the successors of 
Theodosius, was sinking under the vices of its 
internal admimstration, and under the assaults of 
barbarous invaders. At Delhi, as at Ravenna, 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 243 

there was a mock sovereign, a mere pageant im- 
mured in a gorgeous state prison. He was suffered 
to indulge in every sensual pleasure. He was 
adored with servile prostrations. He assumed and 
bestowed the most magnificent titles. But, in fact, 
he was a mere puppet in the hands of some am- 
bitious subject. While the Honorii and Augustuli 
of the East, surrounded by their fawning eunuchs, 
revelled and dozed without knowing or caring what 
might pass beyond the walls of their palace gardens, 
the provinces had ceased to respect a government 
which could neither punish nor protect them. 
Society was a chaos. Its restless and shifting 
elements formed themselves every moment into 
some new combination, which the next moment 
dissolved. In the course of a single generation a 
hundred dynasties grew up, flourished, decayed, 
were extinguished, were forgotten. Every ad- 
venturer who could muster a troop of horse might 
aspire to a throne. Every palace was every year 
the scene of conspiracies, treasons, revolutions, 
parricides. Meanwhile a rapid succession of Alarics 
and Attilas passed over the defenceless empire. A 
Persian invader penetrated to Delhi, and carried 
back in triumph the most precious treasures of the 
House of Tamerlane. The Afghan soon followed, 
by the same track, to glean whatever the Persian 
had spared. The Jauts established themselves on 
the Jumna. The Seiks devastated Lahore. Every 
part of India, from Tanjore to the Himalayas, was 
laid under contribution by the Mahrattas. The 
people were ground down to the dust by the op- 
pressor without and the oppressor within ; by the 
robber from whom the Nabob was unable to protect 
them, by the Nabob who took whatever the robber 



2M THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

had left to them. All the evils of despotism, and 
all the evils of anarchy, pressed at once on that 
miserable race. They knew nothing of govern- 
ment but its exactions. Desolation was in their 
imperial cities, and famine all along the banks of 
their broad and redundant rivers. It seeimed that 
a few more years would suffice to efface all traces 
of the opulence and civilization of an earliest age. 

Such was the state of India when the Company 
began to take part in the disputes of its ephemeral 
sovereigns. About eighty years have elapsed since 
we appeared as auxiliaries in a contest between two 
rival families for a sovereignty of a small corner 
of the Peninsula. From that moment commenced 
a great, a stupendous process — the reconstruction 
of a decomposed society. Two generations have 
passed away ; and the process is complete. The 
scattered fragments of th(». empire of Aurungzebe 
have been united in an empire stronger and more 
closely knit together than that which Aurungzebe 
ruled. The power of the new sovereigns penetrates 
their dominions more completely, and is far more 
implicitly obeyed, than was that of the proudest 
princes of the Mogul dynasty. 

It is true, that the early history of this great 
revolution is chequered with guilt and shame. It 
is true that the founders of our Indian empire too 
often abused the strength which they derived from 
superior energy and superior knowledge. It is true 
that with some of the highest qualities of the race 
from which they sprang, they combined some of 
the Worst defects of the race over which they ruled. 
How should it have been otherwise ? Born in 
humble stations, accustomed to earn a slender 
maintenance by obscure industry, they found 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 245 

themselves transformed in a few months from 
clerks drudging over desks, or captains in march- 
ing regiments, into statesmen and generals, with 
armies at their command, with the revenues of 
kingdoms at their disposal, with power to make 
and depose sovereigns at their pleasure. They 
were what it was natural that men should be who 
had been raised by so rapid an ascent to so dizzy 
an eminence, profuse and rapacious, imperious and 
corrupt. 

It is true, then, that there was too much founda- 
tion for the re])resentations of those satirists and 
dramatists who held up the character of the English 
Nabob to the derision and hatred of a former 
generation. It is true that some disgraceful in- 
trigues, some unjust and cruel wars, some instances 
of odious perfidy and avarice stain the annals of 
our Eastern empire. It is true that the duties of 
government and legislation were long wholly 
neglected or carelessly performed. It is true that, 
when the new rulers at length began to apply 
themselves in earnest to the discharge of their high 
functions, they committed the errors natural to 
rulers who were but imperfectly acquainted with 
the language and manners of their subjects. It is 
true that some measures, which were dictated by 
the purest and most benevolent feelings, have not 
been attended by the desired success. It is true 
that India suffers to this day from a heavy burthen 
of taxation, and from a defective system of law. 
It is true, I fear, that in those states, which are 
connected with us by subsidiary alliance, all the 
evils of oriental despotism have too frequently 
shown themselves in their most loathsome and 
destructive form. 



246 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

All tliis is true. Yet in the history and in the 
present state of our Indian empire I see ample 
reason for exultation and for a good hope. 

I see that we have established order where we 
found confusion. I see that the petty dynasties 
which were generated by the corruption of the 
great Mahometan empire, and which, a century 
ago, kept all India in constant agitation, have been 
quelled by one overwhelming power. I see that 
the predatory tribes who, in the middle of the last 
century, passed annually over the harvests of India 
with the destructive rapidity of a hurricane, have 
quailed before the valour of a braver and sterner 
race — have been vanquished, scattered, hunted 
to their strongholds, and either exterminated by 
the English sword, or compelled to exchange the 
pursuits of rapine for those of industry. 

I look back for many years ; and I see scarcely 
a trace of the vices which blemished the splendid 
fame of the first conquerors of Bengal. I see peace 
studiously preserved. I see faith inviolably 
maintained towards -feeble and dependent states, 
I see confidence gradually infused into the minds 
of suspicious neighbours. I see the horrors of war 
mitigated by the chivalrous and Christian spirit of 
Europe. I see examples of moderation and clem- 
ency, such as I should seek in vain in the annals of 
any other victorious and dominant nation. I see 
captive tyrants, whose treachery and cruelty might 
have excused a severe retribution, living in security, 
comfort, and dignity, under the protection of the 
government which they laboured to destroy. 

I see a large body of civil and military functiona- 
ries resembling in nothing but capacity and valour 
those adventurers who seventy years ago came 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 247 

hither, laden with wealth and infamy, to parade 
before our fathers the plundered treasures of Bengal 
and Tanjore. I reflect with pride that to the 
doubtful splendour which surrounds the memory 
of Hastings and of Clive, we can oppose the spotless 
glory of Elphinstone and Munro. I observe with 
reverence and delight the honourable poverty 
which is the evidence of a rectitude firmly main- 
tained amidst strong temptations. I rejoice to 
see my countrymen, after ruling millions of sub- 
jects, after commanding victorious armies, after 
dictating terms of peace at the gates of hostile 
capitals, after administering the revenues of great 
provinces, after judging the causes of wealthy 
zemindars, after residing at the Courts of tributary 
kings, return to their native land with no more 
than a decent competence. 

I see a government anxiously bent on the public 
good. Even in its errors I recognize a paternal 
feeling towards the great people committed to its 
charge. I see toleration strictly maintained. Yet 
I see bloody and degrading superstitions gradu- 
ally losing their power. I see the morality, the 
philosophy, the taste of Europe, beginning to 
produce a salutary effect on the hearts and under- 
standings of our subjects. I see the public mind 
of India, that public mind which we found debased 
and contracted by the worst forms of political and 
religious tyranny, expanding itself to just and noble 
views of the ends of government and of the social 
duties of man. 

I see evils : but I see the Government actively 
employed in the work of remedying those evils. 
The taxation is heavy ; but the work of retrench- 
ment is unsparingly pursued. The mischiefs arising 



5J48 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

from the system of subsidiary alliance are great : 
but the rulers of India are fully aware of those 
mischiefs, and are engaged in guarding against 
them. Wherever they now interfere for the 
purpose of supporting a native government, they 
interfere also for the purpose of reforming it. 

Seeing these things, then, am I prepared to dis- 
card the Company as an organ of government ? 
I am not. Assuredly I will never shrink from 
innovation where I see reason to believe that 
innovation will be improvement. That the present 
Government does not shrink from innovations 
which it considers as improvements, the measure 
now before the House suiB&ciently shows. But 
surely the burthen of the proof lies on the inno- 
vators. They are bound to lay some ground ; to 
show that there is a fair probability of obtaining 
some advantage before they call upon us to take 
up the foundations of the Indian government. I 
have no superstitious veneration for the Court of 
Directors or the Court of Proprietors, Find me 
a better Council ; find me a better constituent 
body : and I am ready for a change. But of all the 
substitutes for the Company which have hitherto 
been suggested, not one has been proved to be 
better than the Company ; and most of them I 
could, I think, easily prove to be worse. Circum- 
stances might force us to hazard a change. If the 
Company were to refuse to accept of the govern- 
ment unless we would grant pecuniary terms which 
I thought extravagant, or unless we gave up the 
clauses in this Bill which permit Europeans to hold 
landed property, and natives to hold office, I would 
take them at their word. But I will not discard 
them in the mere rage of experiment. 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 249 

Do I call the government of India a perfect 
government ? Very far from it. No nation can' 
be perfectly well governed till it is competent to 
govern itself. I compare the Indian government 
with other governments of the same class, with 
despotisms, with military despotisms, with foreign 
military despotisms *, and I find none that ap- 
proaches it in excellence. I compare it with the 
government of the Spanish colonies — and I am 
proud of my country and my age. Here are a 
hundred millions of people under the absolute rule 
of a few strangers, differing from them physically — 
differing from them morally — mere Mamelukes, 
not born in the country which they rule, not 
meaning to lay their bones in it. If you require 
me to make this government as good as that of 
England, France, or the United States of America, 
I own frankly that I can do no such thing. Reason- 
ing a priori, I should have come to the conclusion 
that such a government must be horrible tyranny. 
It is a source of constant amazement to me that it 
is so good as I find it to be. I will not, therefore, 
in a case in which I have neither principles nor 
precedents to guide me, pull down the existing 
system on account of its theoretical defects. For 
I know that any system which I could put in its 
place would be equally condemned by theory, 
while it would not be equally sanctioned by 
experience. 

Some change in the constitution of the Company 
was, as I have shown, rendered inevitable by the 
opening of the China trade ; and it was the duty 
of the Government to take care that the change 
should not be prejudicial to India. There were 
many ways in which the compromise between 



250 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

commerce and territory might have been effected. 
We might have taken the assets, and paid a sum 
down, leaving the Company to invest that sum as 
they chose. We might have offered English security 
with a lower interest. We might have taken the 
course which the late Government designed to 
take. We might have left the Company in posses- 
sion of the means of carrying on its trade in compe- 
tition with private merchants. My firm belief is, 
that, if this course had been taken, the Company 
must, in a very few years, have abandoned the 
trade or the trade would have ruined the Company. 
It was not, however, solely or principally by regard 
for the interest of the Company, or of the English 
merchants generally, that the Government was 
guided on this occasion. The course which appeared 
to us the most likely to promote the interests of our 
Eastern empire was to make the proprietors of 
India stock creditors of the Indian territory. Their 
interest will thus be in a great measure the same 
with the interest of the people whom they are to 
rule. Their income will depend on the revenues of 
their empire. The revenues of their empire will 
depend on the manner in which the affairs of that 
empire are administered. We furnish them with 
the strongest motives to watch over the interests 
of the cultivator and the trader, to maintain peace, 
to carry on with vigour the work of retrenchment, 
to detect and punish extortion and corruption. 
Though they live at a distance from India — ^though 
few of them have ever seen or may ever see the 
people whom they rule — ^they will have a great 
stake in the happiness of their subjects. If their 
misgovernment should produce disorder in the 
finances, they will themselves feel the effects of 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 251 

that disorder in their own household expenses, I 
believe this to be, next to a representative con- 
stitution the constitution which is the best security 
for good government. A representative constitu- 
tion India cannot at present have. And we have, 
therefore, I think, given her the best constitution 
of which she is capable. 

One word as to the new arrangement which we 
propose with respect to the patronage. It is 
intended to introduce the principle of competition 
in the disposal of writerships ; and from this change 
I cannot but anticipate the happiest results. The 
civil servants of the Company are undoubtedly 
a highly respectable body of men ; and, in that 
body, as in every large body, there are some persons 
of very eminent ability. I rejoice most cordially to 
see this. I rejoice to see that the standard of 
morality is so high in England, that intelligence 
is so generally diffused through England, that 
young persons who are taken from the mass of 
society, by favour and not by merit, and who are 
therefore only fair samples of the mass, should, 
when placed in situations of high importance, be 
so seldom found wanting. But it is not the less 
true, that India is entitled to the service of the 
best talents which England can spare. That the 
average of intelligence and virtue is very high in 
this country, is matter for honest exultation. But 
it is no reason for employing average men where 
you can obtain superior men. Consider too, sir, how 
rapidly the public mind of India is advancing, how 
much attention is already paid by the higher classes 
of the natives to those intellectual pursuits on the 
cultivation of which the superiority of the European 
race to the rest of mankind principally depends. 



252 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

Surely, under such circumstances, from motives 
of selfish policy, if from no higher motive, we ought 
to fill the Magistracies of our Eastern Empire with 
men who may do honour to their country — with 
men who may represent the best part of the English 
nation. This, sir, is our object ; and we believe, 
that by the plan which is now proposed this object 
will be attained. It is proposed that for every 
vacancy in the civil service four candidates shall 
be named, and the best candidate elected by ex- 
amination. We conceive that, under this system, 
the persons sent out will be young men above par — 
young men superior either in talents or in diligence 
to the mass. It is said, I know, that examinations 
in Latin, in Greek and in mathematics are no tests 
of what men will prove to be in life. I am perfectly 
aware that they are not infallible tests ; but that 
they are tests I confidently maintain. Look at 
every walk of life — at this House — at the other 
House — at the Bar — at the Bench — at the Church 
— and see whether it be not true, that those who 
attain high distinction in the world are generally 
men who were distinguished in their academic 
career. Indeed, sir, this objection would prove 
far too much even for those who use it. It would 
prove, that there is no use at all in education. Why 
should we put boys out of their way ? Why should 
we force a lad, who would much rather fly a kite or 
trundle a hoop, to learn his Latin Grammar ? Why 
should we keep a young man to his Thucydides or 
his Laplace, when he would much rather be shoot- 
ing ? Education would be mere useless torture, if, at 
two or three and twenty, a man who has neglected 
his studies were exactly on a par with a man 
who has applied himself to them — exactly as likely 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, *1833 263 

to perform all the offices of public life with credit to 
himself and with advantage to society. Whether 
the English system of education be good or bad is 
not now the question. Perhaps I may think that 
too much time is given to the ancient languages 
and to the abstract sciences. But what then ? 
Whatever be the languages — -whatever be the 
sciences, which it is, in any age or country, the 
fashion to teach, those who become the greatest 
proficients in those languages, and those sciences, 
will generally be the flower of youth — the most 
acute — the most industrious — ^the most ambitious 
of honourable distinctions. If the Ptolemaic system 
were taught at Cambridge, instead of the New- 
tonian, the senior wrangler would nevertheless be 
in general a superior man to the wooden spoon. If, 
instead of learning Greek, we learned the Cherokee, 
the man who understood the Cherokee best, who 
made the most correct and melodious Cherokee 
verses — who comprehended most accurately the 
effect of the Cherokee particles — would generally 
be a superior man to him who was destitute of 
these accomplishments. If astrology were taught 
at, our Universities, the young men who cast 
nativities best would generally turn out a superior 
man. If alchymy were taught, the young man who 
showed most activity in the pursuit of the philo- 
sopher’s stone, would generally turn out a superior 
man. 

I will only add one other observation on this 
subject. Although I am inclined to think that too 
much attention is paid in the education of English 
gentlemen to the dead languages, I conceive, that 
when you are choosing young men to fill situations 
for which the very first and most indispensable 



254 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

qualification is familiarity with foreign languages, 
it would be difficult to find a better test of their 
fitness than their classical acquirements. 

Some persons have expressed doubts as to the 
possibility of procuring fair examinations. I am 
quite sure, that no person who has been either at 
Cambridge or at Oxford can entertain such doubts. 
I feel, indeed, that I ought to apologize for even 
noticing an objection so frivolous. 

Next to the opening of the China trade, the 
change most eagerly demanded by the English 
people was, that the restrictions on the admission 
of Europeans to India should be removed. In this 
measure, there are undoubtedly very great advan- 
tages. The chief advantage is, I think, the im- 
provement which the minds of our native subjects 
may be expected to derive from free intercourse 
with a people far advanced beyond themselves in 
intellectual cultivation. I cannot deny, however, 
that the advantages of this great change are 
attended with some danger. 

The danger is that the new comers, belonging to 
the ruling nation, resembling in colour, in language, 
in manner, those who hold supreme military and 
political power, and differing in all these respects 
from the great mass of the population, may con- 
sider themselves as a superior class, and may 
trample on the indigenous race. Hitherto there 
have been strong restraints on Europeans resident 
in India. Licences were not easily obtained. Those 
residents who were in the service of the Company 
had obvious motives for conducting themselves 
with propriety. If they incurred the serious dis- 
pleasure of the Government, their hopes of promo- 
tion were blighted. Even those, who were not in 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 255 

the public service, were subject to the formidable 
power which the Government possessed of banish- 
ing them at its pleasure. 

The licence of the Government will now no longer 
be necessary to persons who desire to reside in the 
settled provinces of India. The power of arbitrary 
deportation is withdrawn. Unless, therefore, we 
mean to leave the natives exposed to the tyranny 
and insolence of every profligate adventurer who 
may visit the East, we must place the European 
under the same power which legislates for the 
Hindoo. No man loves political freedom more 
than I. But a privilege enjoyed by a few indi- 
viduals in the midst of a vast population who do 
not enjoy it, ought not to be called freedom. It is 
tyranny. In the West Indies I have not the least 
doubt that the existence of the trial by jury and 
of legislative assemblies has tended to make the 
condition of the slaves worse than it would other- 
wise have been. Or, to go to India itself for an 
instance, though I fully believe that a mild penal 
code is better than a severe penal code, the worst 
of all systems was surely that of having a mild code 
for the Brahmins, who sprang from the head of the 
Creator, while there was a severe code for the 
Sudras, who sprang from his feet. India has 
suffered enough already from the distinction df 
castes, and from the deeply rooted prejudices which 
those distinctions have engendered. God forbid 
that we should inflict on her the curse of a new 
caste, that we should send her a new breed of 
Brahmins, authorized to treat all the native 
population as Parias ! 

With a view to the prevention of this evil, we 
propose to give to the supreme Government the 



256 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

power of legislating for Europeans as well as for 
natives. We propose that the regulations of the 
Government shall bind the King’s Court as they 
bind all other Courts, and that registration by the 
judges of the King’s Court shall no longer be neces- 
sary to give validity to those regulations within the 
towns of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay. 

I could scarcely, sir, believe my ears when I 
heard this, part of our plan condemned in another 
place. I should have thought, that it would have 
been received with peculiar favour in that quarter 
where it has met with the most severe condemna- 
tion. What, at present, is the case ? If the 
Supreme Court and the Government differ on a 
question of jurisdiction, or of legislation within the 
towns which are the seats of government, there is 
absolutely no umpire but the Imperial Parliament. 
The device of putting one wild elephant between two 
tame ones was ingenious ; but it may not always 
be practicable. Suppose a tame elephant between 
two wild ones, or suppose, that the whole herd 
should run wild together. The thing is not 
without example. And is it not most unjust and 
ridiculous that on one side of a ditch the edict of the 
Governor-General should have the force of law, and 
on the other side it should be of no effect unless 
registered by the judges of the Supreme Court ? 
If the registration be a security for good legislation, 
we are bound to give that security to all classes of 
our subjects. If the registration be not a security 
for good legislation, why require it ? AVhy give it 
to a million of them, and withhold it from the other 
ninety-nine millions ? Is the system good ? Ex- 
tend it. Is it bad ? Abolish it. But in the name 
of common sense do not leave it as it is. It is “s 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 257 

absurd as our old law of sanctuary. The system of 
imprisonment for debt may be good or bad. But 
no man in his senses can approve of the ancient 
system under which a debtor who might be arrested 
in Fleet Street was safe as soon as he had scampered 
into Whitefriars. Just in the same way, doubts 
may fairly be entertained about the expediency of 
allowing four or five persons to make laws for India ; 
but to allow them to make laws for all India with- 
out the Mahratta ditch, and to except Calcutta, is 
the height of absurdity. 

I say, therefore, either enlarge the power of the 
Supreme Court and give it a general veto on laws, 
or enlarge the power of the Government, and make 
its regulations binding on all Courts without dis- 
tinction. The former course no person has ven- 
tured to propose. To the latter course objections 
have been made, — but objections which to me, I 
must own, seem altogether frivolous. It is acknow- 
ledged, that of late years inconvenience has arisen 
from the relation in which the Supreme Court 
stands to the Government. But, it is said, that 
Court was originally instituted for the protection 
of natives against Europeans. The wise course 
would, therefore, be to restore its original character. 

Now, sir, the fact is, that the Supreme Court has 
never been so mischievous as during the first ten 
years of its power, or so respectable as it has lately 
been. Everybody who knows anything of its early 
history knows, that for a considerable time after 
its institution, it was the terror of Bengal, the 
scourge of native informants, the screen of Euro- 
pean delinquents, a convenient tool of the Govern- 
ment for all purposes of evil, an insurmountable 
obstacle to the Government in all undertakings 

231 -r • 



258 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

for the public good ; — ^that its proceedings were 
made up of pedantry, cruelty, and corruption ; — 
that its disputes with the Government were at one 
time on the point of breaking up the whole fabric 
of society ; and that a convulsion was averted 
only by the dexterous policy of Warren Hastings, 
who at last bought off the opposition of the Chief 
Justice for £8,000 a year. It is notorious, that 
while the Supreme Court opposed Hastings in all 
his best measures, it was a thorough-going accom- 
plice in his worst — that it took part in the most 
scandalous of those proceedings which fifty years 
ago roused the indignation of Parliament and of the 
country — that it assisted in the spoliation of the 
princesses of t)ude — that it passed sentence of 
death on Nuncornar. And this is the Court which we 
are to restore from its present state of degeneracy 
to its original purity. This is the protection 
which we are to give to the natives against the 
Europeans. Sir, so far is it from being true that 
the character of the Supreme Court has deterio- 
rated, that it has perhaps improved more than any 
other institution in India. But the evil lies deep 
in the nature of the institution itself. The judges 
have in our time deserved the greatest respect. 
Their judgement and integrity have done much to 
mitigate the vices of the system. The worst charge 
that can be brought against any of them is that 
of pertinacity — disinterested, conscientious perti- 
nacity — in error. The real evil is the state of the 
law. You have two supreme powers in India. 
There is no arbitrator except a legislature ten 
thousand miles off. Such a system is on the face 
of it an absurdity in politics. My wonder is, not 
that this system has several times been on the 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 259 

point of producing fatal consequences to the peace 
and resources of India, — ^these, I think, are the 
words in which Warren Hastings describes the 
effect of the contest between his Government 
and the judges — but that it has not actually pro- 
duced such consequences. The most distinguished 
members of the Indian Government — the most 
distinguished judges of the Supreme Court — call 
upon you to reform this system. Sir Charles 
Metcalfe, Sir Charles Grey, represent with equal 
urgency the expediency of having one single 
paramount council armed with legislative power. 
The admission of Europeans to India renders it 
absolutely necessary not to delay our decision. 
The effect of that admission would be to raise a 
hundred questions — to produce a hundred contests 
between the council and the judicature. The 
Government would be paralysed at the precise 
moment at which all its energy was required. 
While the two equal powers were acting in opposite 
directions, the whole machine of the State would 
stand still. The Europeans would be uncontrolled ; 
the natives would be unprotected. The conse- 
quences I will not pretend to foresee. Everything 
beyond is darkness and confusion. 

Having given to the Government supreme legis- 
lative power we next propose to give to it for a 
time the assistance of a commission for the pur- 
pose of digesting and reforming the laws of India, 
so that those laws may, as soon as possible, be 
formed into a code. Gentlemen, of whom I wish to 
speak with the highest respect, have expressed a 
doubt whether India be at present in a fit state to 
receive a benefit which is not yet enjoyed by this 
free and highly civilized country. Sir, I can allow 



260 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

to this argument very little weight beyond that 
which it derives from the personal authority of 
those who use it. For, in the first place, our free- 
dom and our high civilization render this improve- 
ment, desirable as it must always be, less indis- 
pensably necessary to us than to our Indian 
subjects : and in the next place our freedom and 
civilization, I fear, render it far more difficult for 
us to obtain this benefit for ourselves than to 
bestow it on them. 

I believe that no country ever stood so much in 
need of a code of laws as India, and I believe also 
that there never was a country in which the want 
might so easily be supplied. I said, that there 
were many points of analogy between the state of 
that country after the fall of the Mogul power, 
and the state of Europe after the fall of the Roman 
Empire. In one respect the analogy is very striking. 
As ill Europe then, so in India now, there are 
several systems of law widely differing from each 
other, but co-existing and co-equal. The indigenous 
])opulation has its own laws. Each of the successive 
races of conquerors has brought with it its own 
peculiar jurisprudence : the Mussulman his Koran 
and its innumerable commentators —the English- 
man his statute-book, and his term reports. As 
there were established in Italy, at one and the same 
time, the Roman law, the Lombard law, the Ripu- 
arian law, the Bavarian law, and the Salic law, so 
we have now in our Eastern empire Hindoo law, 
Mahometan law, Parsee law, English law, per- 
petually mingling with each other, and disturbing 
each other ; varying with the person, varying with 
the place. In one and the same cause the process 
and pleadings are in the fashion of one nation, the 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 261 

judgement is according to the laws of another. An 
issue is evolved according to the rules of West- 
minster, and decided according to those of Benares. 
The only Mahometan book in the nature of a code 
is the Koran ; — the only Hindoo book the Insti- 
tutes. Everybody who knows those books, knows 
that they provide for a very small part of the cases 
which must arise in every community. All beyond 
them is comment and tradition. Our regulations 
in civil matters do not define rights ; they merely 
establish remedies. If a point of Hindoo law arises, 
the judge calls on the Pundit for an opinion. If a 
point of Mahometan law arises, the judge applies 
to the Cauzee. What the integrity of these func- 
tionaries is, we may learn from Sir William Jones. 
That eminent man declared, that he could not 
answer it to his conscience to decide any point of 
law on the faith of a Hindoo expositor. Sir Thomas 
Strange confirms this declaration. Even if there 
were no suspicion of corruption on the part of the 
interpreters of the law, the science which they 
profess is in such a state of confusion that no 
reliance can be placed on their answers. Sir 
Francis Macnaghten tells us, that it is a delusion 
to fancy that there is any known and fixed law 
under which the Hindoo people live ; that texts 
may be produced on any side of any question ; 
that expositors equal in authority perpetually 
contradict each other ; that the obsolete law is 
perpetually confounded with the law actually in 
force, and that the first lesson to be impressed on a 
functionary who has to administer Hindoo law is, 
that it is vain to think of extracting certainty from 
the books of the jurists. The consequence is, 
that in practice the decisions of the tribunals are 



262 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAUL AY, 1833 

altogether arbitrary. What is administered is not 
law, but a kind of rude and capricious equity. I 
asked an able and excellent judge lately returned 
from India how one of our Zillah Courts would 
decide several legal questions of great importance — 
questions not involving considerations of religion 
or of caste — mere questions of commercial law. 
He told me, that it was a mere lottery. He knew 
how he should himself decide them. But he knew 
nothing more. I asked a most distinguished civil 
servant of the Company, with reference to the 
clause in this act abolishing slavery, whether at 
present, if a dancing girl ran away from her master, 
the judge would force her to go back. ‘ Some 
judges he said, ‘ send a girl back ; others set her 
at liberty. The whole is a mere matter of temper 
of the individual judge.’ 

Even in this country, we have had complaints of 
judge-made law ; even in this country, where the 
standard of morality is higher than in almost any 
other part of the world — where, during several 
generations not one depository of our legal tradi- 
tions has incurred the suspicion of personal 
corruption—where there are popular institutions 
— where every decision is watched by a shrewd 
and learned audience — where there is an intelligent 
and observant public — where every remarkable 
case is fully reported in a hundred newspapers — 
where, in short, there is everything which can 
mitigate the evils of such a system. But judge- 
made law, where there is an absolute government 
and a lax morality — where there is no bar and no 
public — is a curse and a scandal not to be endured. 
It is time that the magistrate should know what 
law he is to administer — that the subject should 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 263 

know under what law he is to live. We do not 
mean that all the people of India should live under 
the same law : far from it : there is not a word in 
the Bill — ^there was not a word in my right hon, 
friend's speech — susceptible of such an interpreta- 
tion. We know how desirable that object is ; but 
we also know that it is unattainable. We know 
that respect must be paid to feelings generated by 
differences of religion, of nation, and of caste. 
Much, I am persuaded, may be done to assimilate 
the different systems of law without wounding 
those feelings. But, whether we assimilate those 
systems or not, let us ascertain them, let us digest 
them. We propose no rash innovation ; we wish 
to give no shock to the prejudices of any part of 
our subjects. Our principle is simply this — 
uniformity where you can have it- — diversity 
where you must have it — but in all cases certainty. 

As 1 believe that India stands more in need of a 
code than any other country in the world, I believe 
also that there is no country on which that great 
benefit can more easily be conferred. A code is 
almost the only blessing — -perhaps it is the only 
blessing which absolute governments are better 
fitted to confer on a nation than popular govern- 
ments, The work of digesting a vast and artificial 
system of unwritten jurisprudence, is far more 
easily performed, and far better performed by few 
minds than by many — by a Napoleon than by a 
Chamber of Deputies and a Chamber of Peers — by 
a government like that of Prussia or Denmark, 
than by a government like that of England. A 
quiet knot of two or three veteran jurists is an 
infinitely better machinery for such a purpose than 
a large popular assembly divided, as such assemblies 



264 THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 

almost always are, into adverse factions. This seems 
to me, therefore, to be precisely that point of time 
at which the advantages of a complete written 
code of laws may most easily be conferred on India. 
It is a work which cannot be well performed in an 
age of barbarism — which cannot without great 
difficulty be performed in an age of freedom. It is 
the work which especially belongs to a government 
like that of India — to an enlightened and paternal 
despotism. 

I have detained the House so long, sir, that I will 
defer what I had to say on some parts of this 
measure — im])ortant parts, indeed, but far less 
important, as I think, than those to which I have 
advert(‘d, till we are in committee. There is, how- 
ever, one part of the Bill on which, after what has 
recently passed elsewhere, I feel myself irresistibly 
impelled to say a few words. I allude to that 
wise, that benevolent, that noble clause, which 
enacts that no native of our Indian empire shall, 
by reason of his colour, his descent, or his religion, 
be incapable of holding office. At the risk of being 
called by that nickname which is regarded as the 
most approbrious of all nicknames, by men of 
selfish hearts and contracted minds — at the risk 
of being called a. philosopher — I must say that, to 
the last day of my life, I shall be proud of having 
been one of those who assisted in the framing of the 
Bill which contains that clause. We are told that 
the time can never come when the natives of India 
can be admitted to high civil and military office. 
We are told that this is the condition on which 
we hold our power. We are told, that we are 
bound to confer on our subjects — every benefit 
which they are capable of enjoying ; — no — which 



THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY, 1833 265 

it is in our power to confer on them ; — no — but 
which we can confer on them without hazard to 
our own domination. Against that proposition 
I solemnly protest as inconsistent alike with sound 
policy and sound morality. . . . 

The destinies of our Indian empire are covered 
with thick darkness. It is difficult to form any 
conjecture as to the fate reserved for a state which 
resembles no other in history, and which forms by 
itself a separate class of political phenomena. The 
laws which regulate its growth and its decay are 
still unknown to us. It may be that the public 
mind of India may expand under our system till 
it has outgrown that system ; that by good govern- 
ment we may educate our subjects into a capacity 
for better government ; that, having become in- 
structed in European knowledge, they may, in 
some future age, demand European institutions. 
Whether such a day will ever come I know not. 
But never will I attempt to avert or to retard it. 
Whenever it comes, it will be the proudest day in 
English history. To have found a great people 
sunk in the lowest depths of slavery and super-' 
stition, to have so ruled them as to have made 
them desirous and capable of all the privileges of 
citizens, would indeed be a title to glory all our 
own. The sceptre may pass away from us. Un- 
foreseen accidents may derange our most profound 
schemes of policy. Victory may be inconstant to 
our arms. But there are triumphs which are 
followed by no reverses. There is an empire exempt 
from all natural causes of decay. Those triumphs 
are the pacific triumphs of reason over barbarism ; 
that empire is the imperishable empire of our arts 
and our morals, our literature and our laws. 

K 3 



266 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1833 


21. Government of India Act, 1833 (3 d 4 
Will 4, c. 85). 

III. Provided always, and be it enacted, that 
from and after the said twenty-second day of 
April one thousand eight hundred and thirty-four 
the exclusive right of trading with the Dominions 
of the Emperor of China, and of trading in tea,^ 
continued to the said Company by the said Act 
of the fifty-third year of King George the Third, 
shall cease. 

IV. And be it enacted, that the said Company 
shall, with all convenient speed after the said 
twenty-second day of April one thousand eight 
hundred and thirty-four, close their commercial 
business, and make sale of all their merchandize 
and effects at home and abroad, distinguished in 
their account books as commercial assets, and all 
their warehouses, lands, tenements, hereditaments, 
and property whatsoever which may not be 
retained for the purposes of the Government of the 
said territories, and get in all debts due to them on 
account of the commercial branch of their affairs, 
and reduce their commercial establishments as the 
same shall become unnecessary, and discontinue 
and abstain from all commercial business which 
shall not be incident to the closing of their actual 
concerns, and to the conversion into money of the 
property hereinbefore directed to be sold, or which 
shall not be carried on for the purposes of the said 
Government. 

XXXIX. And be it enacted, that the super- 
1 53 Geo. 3, c. 156. 



GOVERNMENT OP INDIA ACT, 1833 267 

intendence, direction, and control of the whole 
civil and military Government of all the said 
territories and revenues in India shall be and is 
hereby invested in a Governor-General and 
Counsellors, to be styled ‘ The Governor General 
of India in Council.’ 

XL. And be it enacted, that there shall be four 
ordinary members of the said Council, three of 
whom shall from time to time be appointed by the 
said Court of Directors from amongst such persons 
as shall be or shall have been servants of the said 
Company ; and each of the said three ordinary 
members of Council shall at the time of his appoint- 
ment have been in the service of the said Company 
for at least ten years ; and if he shall be in the 
military service of the said Company, he shall not 
during his continuance in office as a member of Coun- 
cil hold any military command, or be employed 
in actual military duties ; and that the fourth 
ordinary member of Council shall from time to 
time be appointed from amongst persons who shall 
not be servants of the said Company by the said 
Court, of Directors, subject to the approbation of 
His Majesty, to be signified in writing by his 
royal Sign Manual, countersigned by the President 
of the said Board ; ^ provided that such last- 
mentioned Member of Council shall not be entitled 
to sit or vote in the said Council except at meetings 
thereof for making laws and regulations ; and it 
shall be lawful for the said Court of Directors 
to appoint the Commander-in- Chief of the Com- 
pany’s forces in India, and if there shall be no 
such Commander-in-Chief, or the offices of such 
Commander-in-Chief and of Governor-General of 
‘ That is, the Board of Control ; see above, pp. 96, 97. 



268 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1833 

India shall be vested in the same person, then the 
Commander-in-Chief of the forces on the Bengal 
establishment, to be an extraordinary member of 
the said Council, and such extraordinary member 
of Council shall have rank and precedence at the 
Council Board, next after the Governor-General. 

XLI. And be it enacted, that the person who 
shall be Governor-General of the Presidency of 
Fort William in Bengal on the twenty-second day 
of April one thousand eight hundred and thirty 
four shall be the first Governor-General of India 
under this act, and such persons as shall be members 
of Council of the same Presidency on that day shall 
be respectively members of the Council constituted 
by this Act. 

XLII. And be it enacted, that all vacancies 
happening in the office of Governor-General of 
India shall from time to time be filled up by the 
said Court of Directors, subject to the approbation 
of His Majesty, to be signified in writing by his 
royal Sign Manual, countersigned by the President 
of the said Board. 

XLIII. And be it enacted, that the said 
Governor-General in Council shall have power to 
make laws and regulations for repealing, amending, 
or altering any laws or regulations whatever now 
in force or hereafter to be in force in the said terri- 
tories or any part thereof, and to make laws and 
regulations for all persons, whether British or 
native, foreigners or others, and for all courts of 
justice, whether established by His Majesty’s 
charters or otherwise, and the jurisdictions thereof, 
and for all places and things whatsoever within 
and throughout the whole and every part of the 
said territories, and for all servants of the said 



GOVERNMENT OE INDIA ACT, 1833 269 

Company within the dominions of princes and 
states in alliance with the said Company ; save 
and except that the said Governor-General in 
Council shall not have the power of making any 
laws or regulations which shall in any way repeal, 
vary, suspend, or affect any of the provisions of 
this act, or any of the provisions of the acts for 
punishing mutiny and desertion of officers and 
soldiers, whether in the service of His Majesty or 
the said Company, or any provisions of any act 
hereafter to be passed in anywise affecting the said 
Company or the said territories or the inhabitants 
thereof, or any laws or regulations which shall in 
any way affect any prerogative of the Crown, or 
the authority of Parliament, or the constitution or 
rights of the said Company, or any part of the 
unwritten laws or constitution of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland whereon 
may depend in any degree the allegiance of any 
person to the Crown of the United Kingdom, or 
the sovereignty or dominion of the said Crown 
over any part of tlie said territories. 

LI. Provided always, and be it enacted, that 
nothing herein contained shall extend to affect in 
any way the right of Parliament to make laws for 
the said territories and for all the inhabitants 
thereof ; and it is expressly declared that a full, 
complete, and constantly existing right and 
power is intended to be reserved to Parliament to 
control, supersede, or prevent all proceedings and 
acts whatsoever of the said Governor-General in 
Council, and to repeal and alter at any time any 
law or regulation whatsoever made by the said 
Governor-General in Council, and in all respects to 



270 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1833 


legislate for the said territories and all the inhabi- 
tants thereof in as full and ample a manner as if 
this Act had not been passed ; and the better to 
enable Parliament to exercise at all times such 
right and power, all laws and regulations made by 
the said Governor-General in Council shall be 
transmitted to England, and laid before both 
Houses of Parliament, in the same manner as is 
now by law provided concerning the rules and 
regulations made by the several governments in 
India. 

LII. And be it enacted, that all enactments, 
provisions, matters, and things relating to the 
Governor-General of Fort William in Bengal in 
Council and the Governor-General of Fort William 
in Bengal alone, respectively, in any other act or 
acts contained, so far as the same are now in force, 
and not repealed by or repugnant to the provisions 
of this act, shall continue and be in force and be 
applicable to the Governor-General of India in 
Council, and to the Governor- General of India 
alone, respectively. 

LIII. And whereas it is expedient that, subject 
to such special arrangements as local circumstances 
may require, a general system of judicial establish- 
ments and police, to which all persons whatsoever, 
as well Europeans as natives, may be subject, 
should be established in the said territories at an 
early period, and that such laws as may be applic- 
able in common to all classes of the inhabitants of 
the said territories, due regard being had to the 
rights, feelings, and peculiar usages of the people, 
should be enacted, and that all laws and customs 
having the force of law within the same territories 
should be ascertained and consolidated, and as 



GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1833 271 

occasion may require amended ; be it therefore 
enacted, that the said Governor-General of India 
in Council shall, as soon as conveniently may be 
after the passing of this act, issue a commission, and 
from time to time commissions, to such persons as 
the said Court of Directors, with the approbation of 
the said Board of Commissioners, shall recommend 
for that purpose, and to such other persons, if 
necessary, as the said Governor-General in Council 
shall think fit, all such persons, not exceeding in 
the whole at any one time five in number, and to 
be styled ‘ the Indian Law Commissioners ’, with 
all such powers as shall be necessary for the 
purposes hereinafter mentioned ; and the said 
Commissioners shall fully inquire into the jurisdic- 
tion, powers, and rules of the existing Courts of 
Justice and police establishments in the said 
territories, and all existing forms of judicial proce- 
dure, and into the nature and operation of all law, 
whether civil or criminal, written or customary, 
prevailing and in force in any part of the said 
territories, and whereto any inhabitants of the 
said territories, whether Europeans or others, are 
now subject : and the said Commissioners shall 
from time to time make reports, in which they 
shall fully set forth the result of their said inquiries, 
and shall from time to time suggest such altera- 
tions as may in their opinion be beneficially made 
in the said Courts of Justice and police establish- 
ments, forms of judicial procedure and laws, due 
regard being had to the distinction of castes, 
difference of religion, and l>he manners and opinions 
prevailing among difierent races and in different 
parts of the said territories. 



272 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1833 

LXXXI. And be it enacted, that it shall be 
lawful for any natural-born subjects of His Majesty 
to proceed by sea to any port or place having a 
Custom-house establishment within the said 
territories, and to reside thereat, or to proceed to 
and reside in or pass through any part of such of 
the said territories as were under the Government 
of the said Company on the first day of January 
oiKi thousand eight hundred, and in any part of 
the countries ceded by the Nabob of the Carnatic, 
of the Province of Cuttack, and of the settlements 
of Singapore and Malacca, without any licence 
whatever ; provided that all subjects of His 
Majesty not natives of the said territories shall, on 
th(ur arrival in any part of the said territories 
from any port or place not within the said terri- 
tories, make known in writing their names, places 
of destination, and objects of pursuit in India, to 
the chief olficer of the Customs or other officer 
authorized for that purpose at such port or place 
as aforesaid. 

LXXXV. And whereas the removal of restric- 
tions on the intercourse of Europeans with the said 
territories will render it necessary to provide 
against any mischief or dangers that may arise 
therefrom, be it therefore enacted, that the said 
Governor-General in Council shall and he is hereby 
required, by law or regulations, to provide with 
all convenient speed for the protection of the 
natives of the said territories from insult and 
outrage in their persons, religions, or opinions. 

LXXXVII. And be it enacted, that no native 
of the said territories, nor any natural-born 



GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1833 273 

subject of His Majesty resident therein, shall, by 
reason only of his religion, place of birth, descent, 
colour, or any of them, be disabled from holding 
any place, or employment under the said Company. 

CHI. And whereas it is expedient to provide 
for the due qualifications of persons to be employed 
in the Civil Service of the said Company in the said 
territories, be it therefore enacted, that the said 
Governor-General of India in Council shall as soon 
as may be after the first day of January in every 
year, make and transmit to the said Court of 
Directors a prospective estimate of the number of 
])ersons, who in the opinion of the said Governor- 
General in Council, will be necessary, in addition 
to those already in India or likely to return 
from Europe, to supply the expected vacancies in 
the civil establishments of the respective govern- 
ments in India in such one of the subsequent years 
as shall be fixed in the rules and regulations herein- 
after mentioned ; and it shall be lawful for the 
said Board of Commissioners to reduce such 
estimate, so that the reasons for such reduction be 
given to the said Court of Directors ; and in the 
month of June in every year, if the said estimate 
shall have been then received by the said Board, 
and if not, then within one month after such 
estimate shall have been received, the said Board 
of Commissioners shall certify to the said Court of 
Directors what number of persons shall be nomi- 
nated as candidates for admission, and what number 
of students shall be admitted to the College of the 
said Company at Haileybury in the then current 
year, but so that at least four such candidates, no 
one of whom shall be under the age of seventeen 



274 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1833 

or above the age of twenty years, be nominated, 
and no more than one student admitted for every 
such expected vacancy in the said civil establish- 
ments, according to such estimate or reduced 
estimate as aforesaid ; and it shall be lawful for 
the said Court of Directors to nominate such a 
number of candidates for admission to the said 
College as shall be mentioned in the Certificate of 
the said Board ; and if the said Cpurt of Directors 
shall not within one month after the receipt of such 
Certificate nominate the whole number mentioned 
therein, it shall be lawful for the said Board of 
Commissioners to nominate so many as shall be 
necessary to supply the deficiency. 

CV. And be it enacted, that the said Candidates 
for admission to the said College shall be subjected 
to an examination in such branches of knowledge 
and by such examiners as the said Board shall 
direct, and shall be classed in a list to be prepared 
by the examiners, and the Candidates whose names 
shall stand highest in such list shall be admitted 
by the said Court as students in the said College 
until the number to be admitted for that year, 
according to the Certificate of the said Board, be 
supplied. 

22 . Sir Charles Namier on the Occupation of 
Scinde, 13 October 1842 

1. It is not for me to consider how we came to 
occupy Scinde, but to consider the subject as it 
now stands, viz. we are here by right of treaties ^ 
entered into by the Ameers, and, therefore we 
stand on the same footing with themselves, for 
> 111 1832 and 1839. 



275 


THE OCCUPATION OF SIND, 1842 

rights held under a treaty are as sacred as the 
right which sanctions that treaty. 

2. There does not appear any public protest 
registered by the Ameers against the treaties. 
They must, therefore, be considered as the free 
expressions of the will of the contracting parties. 
Such then is the relative position of the British 
Government and the Ameers of Scinde at this time. 

3. The English occupy Shikarpore, Bukkur, 
Sukkur, and Kurachee, by treaties, which, if 
rigidly adhered to by the Ameers, would render 
these princes more rich and powerful, and their 
subjects more happy, than they are now. 

4. If sticklers for abstract rights maintain — as no 
doubt they will — that to prevent a man from 
doing mischief is to enslave him, then it might be 
called hard to enforce a rigid observance of these 
treaties ; but this is not the case. The evident 
object of these treaties is to favour our Indian 
interests, by the abolition of barbarism, by 
ameliorating the condition of society, and by 
obliging the Ameers to do, in compliance with 
treaties, that which honourable and civilized 
rulers would do of their own accord. It is very 
necessary to keep this fact in view, because, 
although the desire to do good would not sanction a 
breach of treaty on our part, it does sanction our 
exacting a rigid adherence to the treaties on the 
part of the Ameers ; and the more so, that their 
attempt to break such treaties, evinces the bai- 
barism of those princes, their total want of feeling 
for their subjects, and their own unfitness to 
govern a country. These things must be always 
kept before the mind, or what I am about to say 
will appear unjust, which is not the case. 



276 SIR CHARLES NAPIER 

5. By treaty, the time for which we may occupy 
our present camps is unlimited ; but there is such 
hostility to us on the part of the Ameers — such a 
hatred to the treaties — such a resolution to break 
them in every way ; there is, among their people, 
such a growing attachment to the British rule, that 
putting these facts together, the question arises, 
whether we should abandon the interests of 
humanity, and those of the British Government 
(for in this case they are one), and at once evacuate 
Scinde ; or, sliall we take advantage of existing 
treaties and maintain our camps permanently ? 

6. If we evacuate tliis country, future events 
will inevitably bring us back to the banks of the 
Indus. 

7. If we remain, our camps will soon be filled 
with the subjects of the Ameers, flying from their 
oppression. These camps will thus quickly grow 
into towns, and the peo])le within will Carry on a 
transit trade along the Indus, to the exclusion of 
the subjects of the Ameers without. Among the 
latter, misery and poverty will sojourn ; for the 
exactions of the Ameers will, in a great measure 
destroy both commerce and agriculture among 
their people. Such appears to be the probable 
result, if w^e adhere rigidly to the Treaty, and 
permanently occupy our camps. 

8. This produces another question, viz. is it 
possible that such a state of things can long 
continue ? A Government hated by its subjects, 
despotic, hostile alike to the interests of the English 
and of its own people ; a Government of low 
intrigue, and, above all so constituted that it must, 
in a few years, fall to pieces by the vice of its own 
construction ; will such a government, I ask, not 



277 


THE OCCUPATION OF SIND, 1842 

maintain an incessant petty hostility against us ? 
Will it not incessantly commit breaches of treaties 
— those treaties by which alone we have any right 
to remain in this country, and therefore must 
rigidly uphold ? I conceive that such a state of 
political relations could not last, and that the more 
powerful government w^ould at no very distant 
period swallow up the weaker. 

9. If this reasoning be correct, would it not be 
better to come to the results at once ? I think it 
would be better if it can be done with honesty. 
Let me first consider how we might go to work 
in a matter so critical, and whether the facts, to 
which I called your attention in a former part 
of these observations, will bear me out in what 
I propose. 

10. Several Ameers have broken the Treaty in 
the various instances stated in the accompanying 
‘ Return of Complaints ’ against them. I have 
maintained that we want only a fair pretext to 
coerce the Ameers, and I think the various acts 
recorded in the return give abundant reason to 
take Kurachee, Sukkur, Bukkur, Shikarpore, and 
Subzulkote, for our own ; obliging the Ameers to 
leave a trackway along both banks of the Indus, 
and stipulate for a supply of wood ; but at the 
same time, remitting all tribute, and arrears of 
tribute, in favour of those Ameers whose conduct 
has been correct ; and, finally, enter into a fresh 
treaty with one of these Princes alone as chief, and 
answerable for the others. 

11. I cannot think that such a procedure would 
be either dishonourable, or harsh. I am sure it 
would be humane. The refractory Ameers break 
the Treaty for the gratification of their avaricious 



278 


SIR CHARLES NAPIER 


dispositions, and we punish that breacli, I can 
perceive no injustice in such proceeding. 

12. If it be determined to keep possession of 
Sukkur and Bukkur, I do not think it would be 
politic to give up Shikarpore ; my reasons for this 
opinion are as follows : The town of Sukkur 
stands on an elbow of the Indus, which surrounds 
the town on two sides ; on the other two, at about 
four miles distance, it is closed in by a large jungle, 
through which passes the road to Shikarpore where 
the jungle finishes. Now, if we evacuate Shikar- 
pore, the robber tribes will descend from the hills, 
and establish themselves in this jungle, so that 
Sukkur will be blockaded ; and no one be able to 
move beyond the cliain of sentries, without being 
murdered. To clear this jungle with infantry 
would be impossible ; the robbers would retreat 
before the advancing troops and, when the latter 
retired again, the former would again occupy the 
position in the jungle. But, if we occupy Shi- 
karpore, a body of cavalry stationed there would 
spread along the outskirt of the jungle, while 
infantry would (by concert) push through the wood 
from Sukkur. The robbers, thus cut off from their 
hills, would receive such a terrible punishment, as 
to deter any other tribe from trying the same 
experiment. 

13. In a commercial point, I consider Shikar- 
pore to be of considerable impoitance. It forms 
a depot for the reception of goods from the north 
and west, with which countries it has long possessed 
channels of communication; circumstances of an 
adverse nature may for a while interrupt these, 
but under a firm protecting Government, they 
would soon be again opened out, and from Shikar- 



279 


THE OCCUPATION OF SIND, 1842 

pore goods would be sent to Sukkur, there tojbe 
shipped on the Indus, and would also be passed by 
land to Larkhana, and thence on to Kurachee. 
These seem formerly to have been the great lines 
of trade. They are geographically and naturally 
BO, and will, therefore, quickly revive. But if 
Shikarpore be left to the mercy of the surrounding 
gangs of freebooters, commerce cannot thrive, 
nor, without Shikarpore be strongly guarded, can 
it pass through the jungle to Sukkur. These two 
towns are so placed as naturally to support each 
other in commerce. 

14. In a political light Shikarpore has the 
advantage of being chiefly inhabited by a Hindoo 
population, tolerated for ages by the Mussulmans, 
and, consequently, forming a pacific link of inter- 
course between us and the nations north and west ; 
through Shikarpore, these Hindoos will be the 
means of gradually filtering the stream of commerce 
and social intercourse between the Mahomedans 
and ourselves, and, in time, unite those who will 
not abruptly amalgamate. Shikarpore contains 
many rich banking houses, which is a sure evidence 
of its being a central point of communication 
between the surrounding countries, and, con- 
sequently, one where the British Government 
would learn what was going on in Asia. The 
money market is, generally speaking, the best 
political barometer. 

15. The robber tribes in this neighbourhood 
have kept down this town in despite of its natural 
and acquired advantages ; in fact, the robber is 
everywhere the master. Therefore all around is 
barbarous, and barbarous must continue to be, 
till civilization gradually encroaches upon these 



SIR CHARLES NAPIER 


m 

lawless people ; and, I think, Shikarpore is 
precisely one of those grand positions that ought 
to be seized upon for that purpose. I have, there- 
fore, directed Major-G-eneral England not to 
evacuate this town till further instructions are 
received from the Governor-General. 

16. I shall keep this memorandum till the arrival 
of Major Outram, and will request of him to peruse 
it, that he may give his opinion u])on the view 
which I have taken ; an opinion, which his ex- 
perience of these countries, his abilities, and the 
high situation in which he has been placed by the 
Governor-General, all render very important. If 
Major Outram concurs in the opinions which I have 
ventured to express, they will be strengthened, if 
not, the Governor-General will be made acquainted 
with the objections of one possessing great local 
knowledge. 

17. I have drawn up this memorandum entirely 
on my own consideration of the subject ; but since 
Major Outrarn’s arrival, which took place when I 
finished the last paragraph, he has given me every 
possible assistance. He concurs in all I have said 
in the foregoing paragraphs, but, at the same time, 
he has added much to my local knowledge, and in 
justice to the Ameers, I must, with this increase of 
information, enlarge upon what I have stated. 
The Ameers say, that they did not understand 
Article XI of the treaty with Hyderabad to 
prohibit the levying of tolls on their own subjects. 
It seems that they urge, in proof of their mis- 
conception, that they resisted the signing the 
Treaty, because of other Articles, less important, 
yet never objected to Article XI, because they 
relied upon Article V. This may be, and I would 



281 


THE OCCUPATION OF SIND, 1842 

willingly, if possible, suppose that they really did 
conceive that the Treaty gave them the right of 
levying tolls oniheir own subjects ; but my answer 
is, that they have attempted to levy tolls on the 
boats of the Khan of Bhawulpore, which the 
Treaty assuredly does not give them any right to 
do ; and they have even fired into the boats of 
merchants from that place. The Treaty could not 
be misconstrued on these points, and, therefore, I 
do not believe that they misconstrued the terms of 
the Treaty, but broke Article XI purposely. The 
Treaty has also been broken by treasonable 
correspondence, and other vexatious acts, as set 
forth in the accompanying return. 

18. Now, what will be the punishment which I 
propose to inflict for their misconduct, amount to ? 
Injury to their family ? No ! Injury to their 
subjects ? No ! To what then ? To the reduction 
of their territory by four places ; two of which 
(Sukkur and Bukkur) are barred spots, yielding no 
revenue ; and the other two (Kurachee and Shikar- 
pore) towns that their tyranny has nearly ruined, 
and for one of which, Shikarpore, we have nego- 
tiations pending, yet to obtain these places in 
seignorage, it is proposed to remit all tribute in 
arrear, and, for the future, withdraw our resident 
from Hyderabad, ensure the amelioration of the 
impoverished state, in which their subjects now 
languish, and, in time add to the power and 
wealth of the Ameers themselves, by opening the 
commerce of the river. 

19. To their selfish feelings and avarice,and love 
of hunting, are such great general interests to be 
sacrificed? I think not; the real interests of the 
Ameers themselves demand that their puerile 



282 


SIR CHARLES NAPIER 


pursuits and blind avaricious proceedings should 
be subjected to a wholesale control, which their 
breaches of treaties, and our power, give us, at this 
moment, a lawful right to exercise, and the means 
of peaceably enforcing. If any civilized man were 
asked the question, ‘ were you the ruler of Scinde, 
what would you do ? ’ his answer would be ‘ I 
would abolish the tolls upon the rivers, make 
Kurachee a free port, protect Shikarpore from 
robbers, make Sukkur a mart for trade on the 
Indus. I would make a track-way along its banks ; 
I would get steam-boats.’ Yet all this is what the 
Ameers dread. 

20. They have broken* treaties, they have given 
a pretext, and I have a full conviction (perhaps 
erroneously) that what I propose is just and 
humane. I will go further, and say that, as 
Nusseer Khan of Hyderabad has openly broken the 
Treaty, if the Governor-General chooses to punish 
him, he might justly seize the district of Subzul- 
kote, and give it to the Khan of Bhawulpore, as I 
have understood there was some intention of doing. 

21. The second point to which Major Outram 
has drawn my attention is a very strong one. He 
tells me that the tribes on the river above that part 
possessed by the Ameers of Scinde, do levy tolls, 
and that there is no treaty or public document 
forthcoming, in virtue of which we can call upon 
the Ameers, of even Upper Scinde, not to levy tolls 
upon their own subjects. It is therefore evident, 
that to call upon the Ameers of Hyderabad to 
desist from levying tolls, and to allow the tribes 
above them on the river to do so, would be unjust ; 
that is to say, it would be unjust to allow the 
others to levy tolls, but not unjust to prevent the 



283 


THE OCCUPATION OF SIND, 1842 

Ameers from doing so. The answer to the argu- 
ment : ‘ That tolls are levied on the Northern 
Indus ’ is just this : we should say to these 
northern tribes, ‘ We have with great trouble 
secured to your boats ^ free passage on the river 
through Scinde ; we are resolved to open the 
commerce of this great highway of nations ; and 
you, who all receive benefit, must join in this great 
measure for the good of all, and to the loss of 
none. Therefore, to excuse the Ameers upon the 
ground that others are not equally coerced, is 
answered by coercing the others. 

22. Having thus given the best view that I can 
take of this intricate subject, I shall accompany 
this report by various documents, among which 
there is one giving a kind of return, if I may so call 
it, of the accusations against the Ameers, upon 
which accusations, relative to which I have read 
every paper, I have founded my opinion of their 
conduct, and, by referring to this return, it will 
be seen whethei I have justly estimated the com- 
plaints made against them by the Political Agents. 

23. I have also added the documents verifying 
each transaction. I have also begged of Major 
Outram to give me a memorandum of the state in 
which the Treaty with the Ameers, for the purchase 
of Shikarpore, remains, as it has l3een in abeyance 
since last year. From this memorandum it would 
appear, that in addition to the great advantages 
to Sukkur, which would attend the occupation of 
Shikarpore, this district would be a very valuable 
acquisition, in point of revenue, in time ; and 
could with the aid of Kurrachee, meet the expense 
of guarding our newly acquired towns on the banks 
of the Indus. 



284 .SIR ( HARLES NAPIER 

24. Should it hereafter be deemed proper to 
make the proposed arrangements with the Ameers, 
so as to punish those who have broken the treaty, 
the details of such arrangements can be easily 
made. The transfer of tribute due would ade- 
quately repay whatever portions of the districts in 
question belong to the Ameers, whose conduct had 
been loyal, when compared with that of the others. 

23. The Earl of Dalliousie, 28 February 1856 

2. When I sailed from England in the winter of 
1847, to assume the Government hi India, there 
prevailed universal conviction among public men 
at home that permanent peace had at length 
been securt^d in the East. Before the summer 
came, we were already involved in the second 
Sikh war. 

That we were so, was due to no precipitation or 
fault of ours. The murder of the British officers 
at Mooltan, and the open rebellion of the Dewan 
Moolraj, were not made pretext for quarrel with 
the Government of Lahore. On the contrary, the 
offence of the Dewan Moolraj was sedulously 
distinguished from national wrong. The Sikhs 
themselves were called upon to punish Moolraj as 
a rebel against their own sovereign, and to exact 
reparation for the British Government, whose 
protection they had previously invoked. 

But when it was seen that the spirit of the whole 
Sikh people was inflamed by the bitterest animosity 
against us ; when chief after chief deserted our 
cause, until nearly their whole army, led by sirdars 
who had signed the treaties, and by members of 
the Council of Regency itself, was openly arrayed 



THE EARL OF DALHOUSIE, 1856 286 

against us ; when, above all, it was seen that the 
Sikhs, in their eagerness for our destruction, had 
even combined in unnatural alliance with Dost 
Mahomed Khan and his Mahomedan tribes ; it 
became manifest that there was no alternative left. 
The question for us Vl^as no longer one of policy or 
of expediency, but one of national safety. 

Accordingly, the government put forth its power. 
After a prolonged campaign, and a struggle severe 
and anxious, the Sikhs were utterly defeated and 
subdued ; the Afghans were driven with ignominy 
through the mountains, and the Punjab became 
a British province. 

3. When little more than two years had passed, 
the Grovernment of India again was suddenly 
engaged in hostilities with Burmah. 

Certain British raiders in the port of Rangoon 
had been subjected to gross outrage by the officers 
of the King of Ava, in direct violation of the treaty 
of Yandaboo. 

Holding to the wisdom of Lord Wellesley’s 
maxim, that an insult offered to the British flag at 
the mouth of the Ganges should be resented as 
promptly and as fully as an insult offered at the 
mouth of the Thames, I should, under any cir- 
cumstances, have regarded it as sound policy to 
exact reparation for wrong done to British subjects 
from any native state. But our relations with the 
Burmese Court, and the policy it had long pursued 
towards us, imposed upon the Government of 
India, at the time to which I refer, the absolute 
necessity of exacting from it reparation for the 
systematic violation of treaty, of which British 
traders had now made formal complaint. 

Of all the Eastern nations with which the Govern- 



286 THE EARL OF DALHOUSIE, 1856 

ment of India lias had to do, the Burmese were the 
most arrogant and overbearing. 

During the years since the treaty with them had 
been concluded, they had treated it with disregard, 
and had been allowed to disregard it with impunity. 
They had been permitted to worry away our 
envoys by petty annoyances from their court ; 
and their insolence had even been tolerated, when 
at last they vexed our Commercial Agent at 
Rangoon into silent departure from their port. 
Inflated by such indirect concessions as these, the 
Burmans had assumed again the tone they used 
before the war of 1825. On more than one occasion 
they had threatened recommencement of hostilities 
against-us, and always at the most untoward time. 

However contemptible the Burman race may 
seem to critics in Europe, they have ever been 
regarded in the East as formidable in the extreme. 
Only five and twenty years before, the news of 
their march towards C’hittagong had raised a panic 
in the bazaars of Calcutta itself ; and even in the 
late war a rumour of their supposed approach 
spread consternation in the British districts of 
Assam and Arracaii. 

If deliberate and gross wrong should be tamely 
borne from such a people as this, without vindica- 
tion of our rights or exaction of reparation for the 
wrong — whether the motive of our inaction were 
desire of peace or contempt for the Burman power 
—it was felt that the policy would be full of danger. 
For the Government of India could never, con- 
sistently with its own safety, permit itself to stand 
for a single day in an attitude of inferiority towards 
a native power, and least of all towards the Courts 
of Ava. 



287 


THE EARL OP DALHOUSIE, 1856 

Every effort was made to obtain reparation by 
friendly means. The reparation required was no 
more than compensation for the actual loss in- 
curred. But every effort was vain. Our demands 
were evaded ; our officers were insulted. The 
warnings which we gave were treated with dis- 
regard ; and the period of grace which we allowed 
was employed by the Burmese in strengthening 
their fortifications, and in making every prepara- 
tion for resistance. 

Thereupon the Government of India dispatched 
a powerful expedition to Pegu ; and within a few 
weeks the whole of the coast of Burmah, with all 
its defences, was in our possession . 

Even then the Government of India abstained 
from further operations for several months, in the 
hojje that, profiting by experience, the King of Ava 
would yet accede to our just demands. 

But our forbearance was fruitless. Accordingly, 
in the end of 1852, the British troops took posses- 
sion of the kingdom of Pegu, and the territory was 
retained, in order that the Government of India 
might hold from the Burman state, both adequate 
compensation for })a8t injury and the best security 
against future danger. 

4. Since hostilities with Burmah ceased, the 
Indian empire has been at peace. 

No prudent man, who has any knowledge of 
Eastern affairs, would ever venture to predict the 
maintenance of continued peace within our Eastern 
possessions. Experience, frequent hard and recent 
experience, has taught us that war from without, 
or rebellion from within, may at any time be raised 
against us, in quarters where they were the least 
to be expected, and by the most feeble and unlikely 



288 THE EARL OP DALHOUSIE, 1856 

instruments. No man, therefore, can ever prudently 
hold forth assurance of continued peace in India. 

But, having regard to the relation in which the 
Government of India stands towards each of the 
several foreign powers around it, I think it may be 
safely said that there seems to be no quarter from 
which formidable war can reasonably be appre- 
hended at present. 

6. For nearly 40 years, Nipal has faithfully 
observed the peace she bought so dearly. Her 
minister, sagacious and able, has himself been 
witness of the vast resources of our power, during 
his recent visit to Europe. He has been for some 
time engaged in a war with Thibet, which has been 
productive of heavy charge, while it has brought 
neither poWer nor profit to Nipal, and must have 
given umbrage to China, whose tributary she is. 
From Nipal, therefore, there is even less probability 
of hostility now, than in any one of the 40 years 
during which she has in good faith observed the 
peace which she solemnly bound herself to maintain 
and which her obvious interests recommend. 

7. Maharajah Golab Sing, of Jummoo and 
Cashmere, so long as he lives, will never depart 
from the submissive policy he announced, with 
unmistakable sincerity in his air, when in Durbar 
at Wuzeerabad 'he caught my dress in his hands, 
.and cried aloud, ^ Thus I grasp the skirts of the 
British Government, and I will never let go my hold.’ 

And when, as must soon be, the Maharajah shall 
pass away, his son, Meean Rumbeer Sing, will have 
enough to do to maintain his ground against rivals 
of his own blood, without giving any cause of 
ofience to a powerful neighbour, which he well 
knows can crush him at his will. 



289 


THE EARL OF DALHOUSIE, 1856 

8. On the western border, a treaty has been 
made with the Khan of Kelat, whereby he becomes 
the friend of our friends, and the enemy of our 
enemies, and engages to give us temporary 
possession of such positions within his territory 
as we may at any time require for purposes of 
defence. 

9. Lastly, a treaty was concluded during the 

past year with the Ameer Dost Mahomed Khan of 
Cabool. It bound him to be the friend of our 
friends and the enemy of our enemies, while it 
imposed no corresponding obligation upon us, 
from which inconvenience or embarrassment could 
arise. The Ameer himself sought our friendship, 
and he has already shown that he regards it as a 
tower of strength. ^ 

Thus the enmity which existed through many 
years, and which was aggravated by the Afghan 
policy of 1849, has happily been removed, without 
any sacrifice upon our part, and to our manifest 
advantage. An alliance has been timely formed 
with the leading Afghan state, upon the solid basis 
of common interest against a common enemy. 
Already, the consequences of the treaty have 
developed themselves in the conquest of Candahar 
by the Ameer Dost Mahomed Khan ; an event 
which has largely increased the Ameer’s power, 
while it has brought to pass for us, that every 
portion of our western frontier, from the Hima- 
layas even to the sea, is now covered against 
hostile attack by the barrier of a treaty with a 
friendly power. 

I venture to think that the Court of Directors 
will see in this brief summary ample reason to be 
content with the condition in which I leave the 

231 T. 



THE EARL OF DALHOUSIE, 1856 

relations of the Honourable East India Company 
with every foreign state around its borders. 

10. As regards the internal tranquillity of the 
empire, I have already observed that no man can 
presume to warrant its continuance, with certainty, 
for a day. In territories and among a population 
so vast, occasional disturbance must needs prevail. 
Raids and forays are, and will still be, reported 
from the western frontier. From time to time 
marauding expeditions will descend into the 
plains, and again expeditions to punish the 
marauders will penetrate the hills. Nor can it be 
expected but that, among races so various and 
multitudes so innumerable, local outbreaks will 
from tinae to time occur, as little looked for as that 
of the Sonthal tribe in the l)amun-i-koh. 

But the rising of the Sonthal tribe has been 
repressed, and measures of precaution have been 
taken, such as may be expected to prevent all risk 
of its recurrence. 

With respect to the frontier raids, they are and 
must for the present be viewed as events insepar- 
able from the state of society which for centuries 
past has existed among the mountain tribes. They 
are no more to be regarded as interruptions of the 
general peace in India, than the street brawls 
which appear among the every-day proceedings of 
a police court in London are regarded as indications 
of the existence of civil war in England. 

12. During the eight years over which we now 
look back, the British territories in the East have 
been iarg^^y increased. Within that time, four 
kingdoms nave passed under the sceptre of the 
Queen of England ; and various chiefships and 
separate tracts have been brought under her sway. 



29J 


THE EARL OP DALHOUSIE, 1856 

13. The kingdom of the Punjab and the kingdom 
of Pegu were the fruits of conquest, which followed 
upon the wars whose origin and issue have been 
already stated. 

14. The kingdom of Nagpore became British 
territory by simple lapse, in the absence of all 
legal heirs. The kingdom, which had been granted 
to the reigning Rajah by the British Government 
when it had become forfeited by the treachery of 
Appa Sahib, was left without a claimant when the 
Rajah died. No son had been born to his Highness ; 
none had been adopted by him ; none, as they had 
themselves admitted, was adopted at the Rajah’s 
death by the Ranees his widows. There remained 
no one male of the line, who descended ftom the 
stock and bore the name of Bhonslah. 

The British Government, therefore, refused to 
bestow the territory in free gift upon a stranger, 
and wisely incorporated it with its own dominions. 

15. Lastly, the kingdom of Oude has been 
assumed in perpetual government for the Honour- 
able East India Company ; in pursuance of a 
policy which has so recently been under the con- 
sideration of the Honourable Court, that I deem it 
unnecessary to refer to it more particularly here. 

16. The principality of Sattara was included in 
the British territories in 1849, by right of lapse, 
the Rajah having died without male heir. 

17. In like manner the chiefship of Jhansie has 
reverted to the possession of the Indian Govern- 
ment. 

18. Lastly, by a treaty concluded in 1863, his 
Highness the Nizam has assigned in perpetual 
government to the Honourable East India Com- 
pany the province of Berar, and other districts of his 



282 THE EARL OF DALHOUSIE, 1856 

state, for the permanent maintenance of the 
Hyderabad Contingent, for the payment of certain 
debts which he had incurred, and for the termina- 
tion of those transactions which for many years 
had been the fruitful source of dispute, and had 
even endangered the continuance ©f friendly 
relations between the states. 

19. By the several territorial acquisitions which 
have just been enumerated, a revenue of not less 
than four millions sterling (4,000,000 1 .) has been 
added to the annual income of the Indian empire. 

25. The several new provinces, whose govern- 
ment we have assumed, have been administered in 
tranquillity and with success. 

The r^arkable results which have attended the 
labours of the able and eminent men, to whom was 
committed the charge of the province of the Punjab, 
are now familiar to Parliament and to the country. 
I feel it to be unnecessary to add even a single 
word to the Punjab reports already submitted to 
the Honourable Court, which explain how ‘ internal 
peace has been guarded, how the various establish- 
ments of the state have been organized, how 
violent crime been repressed, the penal law 
executed and prison discipline enforced ; how 
civil justice has been administered ; how the 
taxation has been fixed and the revenues collected ; 
how commerce has been set free, agriculture 
fostered, and the national resources developed, 
how plans for future improvement have been 
projected, and, lastly, how the finances have been 
managed.’ ^ 

26. In the province of Pegu the results of our 
administration have been satisfactory in a high 

First Punjab Report, p. 462. 



293 


THE EARL OF DALHOUSIE, 1856 

degree, though they have neither the brilliancy 
nor the interest which attaches to the labours of 
the local officers in the Punjab. 

But in Pegu also we have the satisfaction of 
knowing, that, in spite of the peculiar discourage- 
ments and heavy difficulties with which our officers 
have had to contend, complete tranquillity has 
long since been established. The people, lightly 
taxed, and well to do, are highly contented with 
our rule. Order and quiet prevail throughout the 
districts. Even in Tharrawaddy, which, under the 
Burman rule, was the permanent refuge of rebellion 
and crime, all outrage has ceased. The rivers, the 
great highways of the country, watched by an 
effective police, are traversed in safety by all. 
Trade is rapidly increasing. A new port has' been 
founded for the new European trade which has at 
once sprung up ; and, light as taxation is, the 
revenue has already exceeded the amount at 
which I estimated its probable measure ; for it is 
expected that 27 lakhs will be collected this 
year. 

Population alone is wanting. When that de- 
ficiency shall have been supplied, the province of 
Pegu will equal Bengal in fertility of production, 
and will surpass it in every other respect. 

27. The anticipations of those who believed that 
the renewal of British authority in Nagpore would 
be hailed with lively satisfaction by the whole 
population of the province have been more than 
fulfilled by the event. 

The Raj was transferred by a simple order to the 
possession of the British Crown. Not one additional 
soldier was moved into the province. Our civil 
administration has been introduced into every 



2U THE EARL OF DALHOUSIE, 1856 

district. Such portion of the army as was required 
has been embodied and disciplined in our pay ; 
while the rest have been pensioned, or discharged 
with a handsome gratuity. Perfect contentment 
and quiet prevail. Beyond the palace walls not a 
murmur has been heard ; and in no single instance 
throughout the districts has the public peace been 
disturbed. 

28 . Equally happy results have attended the 
assignment which the Nizam was persuaded to 
make of the districts belonging to the state of 
Hyderabad. 

In the possession of Berar and the neighbouring 
districts of Nagj)ore, the British Government, it 
deserves*to be remembered, has secured the finest 
cotton tracts which are known to exist in all the 
continent of India ; and thus has opened up a great 
additional channel of supjdy, through which to 
make good a felt deficiency in the staple of one 
great branch of its manufacturing industry. 

Since the assignment was made all disputes with 
the Nizam have ceased. 

Though the districts assigned were covered with 
j)laces of defence, the famous fortress of Gawilghur 
among the rest, and although they were garrisoned 
by Arabs or Kohillas, yet all were delivered over 
submissively and at once, and not a single shot 
was fired in anger. 

There also the civil administration has been 
introduced. Crime — especially the violent crime 
of dacoity— has already much diminished. The 
revenue is already rapidly increasing. The public 
tranquillity has not been disturbed by even a 
single popular tumult ; and the admirable little 
army, which was formerly the Nizam’s Contingent, 



THE EARL OF DALHOITSIE, 1856 2^ 

but which is now a British force, is available for 
any service for which it may be required. 

29. The assumption of the government of Oude 
is an event too recent to admit of any record being 
given of the progress that has been made towards 
the organization of its future administration. The 
government of the province was assumed on the 
7th of this month. Up to the present time no 
resistance has been attempted, no disturbance of 
the public peace has occurred. The troops of the 
king are contentedly taking service in our pay ; 
and thus far at least no zemindar or chief has 
refused submission to our authority. 

A complete civil administration has been pre- 
pared, and the military force which it wasHbtended 
to retain had been fully organized, before negotia- 
tions w'ere opened with the King. Officers had 
been named to every apjjointment. The best men 
that could be found available were selected from 
the civil and military services for the new offices 
in Oude, and the Government has every reason to 
anticipate that they will achieve an equal degree 
of success, as those to whom similar tasks have 
previously been committed. 

30. It is not, however, in the new provinces alone 
that great changes have been brought to pass. 
When the Statute of 1833 expired, material and 
important changes were made by the hand of 
Parliament upon the frame of the administration 
itself. Of these, two principal measures are Worthy 
of note. 

31. Until that time the local government of 
Bengal had been placed in the hands of the 
Governor- General of India. But in the year 1863 
the system, by which the officer charged with the 



296 THE EARL OF DALHOUSIE, 1856 

responsibility of controlling the government of all 
India was further burdened with local duties of vast 
extent and importance, was happily abandoned. 
The Governor-General was finally liberated from 
the obligation of performing an impossible task, 
and a Lieutenant-Governor was appointed to the 
charge of Bengal alone. 

The importance of this measure cannot be 
overrated. 

32. At the same time another great change was 
introduced, equally novel in its character, and not 
less important. 

A Council was appointed as the Legislature of 
India, .which was no longer identical with the 
SupremS*‘ Council, but included divers other 
members, and exercised its functions by separate 
and distinct proceedings of its own. 

The organization of the Legislative Council 
proved to be a work which involved great labour, 
and was attended with many difficulties. The 
proceedings of the Council, however, were speedily 
reduced to form. The duties of legislation have 
subsequently been laboriously and faithfully per- 
formed. The public has long since had access to its 
deliberations. Its debates and jmpers are printed 
and published ; and I trust, and believe, that 
Parliament and the public will each year see 
reason to be more and more content with the 
manner in which the Legislative Council of 
India will fulfil the purposes for which it was 
established. 

41. Seven years ago the heir apparent to the 
King of Delhi died. He was the last of the race 
who had been born in the purple. The Court of 
Directors was accordingly advised to decline to 



297 


THE EARL OF DALHOUSTE, 1856 

recognize any other heir apparent, and to permit 
the kingly title to fall into abeyance upon the death 
of the present King, who even then was a very aged 
man. The Honourable Court accordingly conveyed 
to the Grovernment of India authority to terminate 
the dynasty of Timour, whenever the reigning King 
should die. But as it was found that, although the 
Honourable Court had consented to the measure, 
it had given its consent with great reluctance, I 
abstained from making use of the authority which 
had been given to me. The grandson of the King 
was recognized as heir apparent ; but only on 
condition that he should quit the palace in Delhi 
in order to reside in the palace at the Kootub ; and 
that he should, as King, receive the ^vernor- 
Gfeneral of India at all times on terms of perfect 
equality. 

42. The Nawab Nazim of Bengal having per- 
mitted a cruel murder, by the infliction of bastinado, 
to be committed within his jurisdiction, and almost 
at the door of his tent, his Highness’s peculiar 
jurisdiction and legal exemption were taken away 
from him ; and he was subjected to the disgrace of 
losing a large portion of the salute of honour which 
he has previously received. 

43. During the last autumn the Nawab of the 
Carnatic very suddenly died. 

As the treaty by which the Musnud of the 
Carnatic was conferred on his Highness’s pre- 
decessor was exclusively a personal one ; as the 
Nawab had left no male heir ; and as both he and 
his family had disreputably abused the dignity of 
their position, and the large share of public revenue 
which had been allotted to them ; the Court of 
Directors has been advised to place the title of 



298 THE EARL OF DALHOUSIE, 1856 

Nawab in abeyance, granting fitting pensions to 
the several members of the Carnatic family. 

44. Very shortly after the death of the Nawab 
of the Carnatic, the Rajah of Tanjore deceased. 
He left no son, and no male heir, direct or indirect, 
who bore his name. The Honourable .Court was 
therefore advised to resume the large stipend which 
the Rajah had enjoyed, as a lapse to the Govern- 
ment, pensions being granted to the members of 
the family as in all similar cases. 

24. Petition froyn the East India Company to 
Parliament, February 1858 

HuMBLY«eHEWETH, 

That your petitioners, at their own expense, and 
by the agency of their own civil and military 
servants, originally acquired for this country its 
magnificent empire in the East, 

That the foundations of this empire were laid by 
your petitioners, at that time neither aided nor 
controlled by Parliament, at the same period at 
which a succession of administrations under the 
control of Parliament were losing to the Crown of 
Great Britain another great empire on the opposite 
side of the Atlantic. 

That during the period of about a century which 
has since elapsed, the Indian possessipns of this 
country have been governed and defended from 
the resources of those possessions, without the 
smallest cost to the British Exchequer, which, to 
the best of your petitioners’ knowledge and belief, 
cannot be said of any other of the numerous 
foreign dependencies of the Crown. 

That it being manifestly improper that the 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 299 

administration of any British possession should be 
independent of the general Government of the 
empire, Parliament provided, in 1783, that a 
department of the Imperial Government should 
have full cognizance of, and power of control over, 
the acts of your petitioners in the administration 
of India ; since which time the home branch of the 
Indian Government has been conducted by the 
joint counsels, and on the joint responsibility, of 
your petitioners and of a minister of the Crown. 

That this arrangement has at subsequent 
periods undergone reconsideration from tlie Legis- 
lature, and various comprehensive and careful 
Parliamentary inquiries have been made into its 
practical operation ; the result of whichrtfas been, 
on each occasion, a renewed grant to your peti- 
tioners of the powers exercised by them in the 
administration of India. 

That the last of these occasions was so recent as 
1853, in which year the arrangements which had 
existed for nearly three-quarters of a century 
were, with certain modifications, re-enacted, and 
still subsist. 

That, notwithstanding, your petitioners have re- 
ceived an intimation from Her Majesty’s Ministers 
of their intention to propose to Parliament a Bill 
for the purpose of placing the government of Her 
Majesty’s East Indian Dominions under the direct 
authority of the Crown — a change necessarily 
involving the abolition of the East India Company 
as an instrument of government. 

That your petitioners have not been informed of 
the reasons which have induced Her Majesty’s 
Ministers, without any previous inquiry, to come 
to the resolution of putting an end to a system of 



300 EAST INDIA COMPANY 

administration, which Parliament, after inquiry, 
deliberately confirmed and sanctioned less than 
five years ago, and which, in its modified form, has 
not been in operation quite four years, and cannot 
be considered to have undergone a sufficient trial 
during that short period. 

That your petitioners do not understand that 
Her Majesty’s Ministers impute any failure to those 
arrangements or bring any charge, either great or 
small, against your petitioners. But the time at 
which the proposal is made compels your peti- 
tioners to regard it as arising from the calamitous 
events which have recently occurred in India. 

That ^ur petitioners challenge the most search- 
ing inv^igation into i-he mutiny of the Bengal 
army, and the causes, whether remote or immediate, 
which produced that mutiny. They have instructed 
the Government of India to appoint a commission 
for conducting such an inquiry on the spot. And 
it is their most anxious wish tiiat a similar inquiry 
may be instituted in this country by your [Lord- 
ships’] Honourable House ; in order that it may 
be ascertained whether anything either in the 
constitution of the Home Government of India, or 
in the conduct of those by whom it has been 
administered, has had any share in producing the 
mutiny, or has in any way impeded -the measures 
for its suppression ; and whether the mutiny 
itself, or any circumstance connected with it, 
affords any evidence of the failure of the arrange- 
ments under which India is at present administered. 

That, were it even true that these arrangements 
had failed, the failure could constitute no reason 
for divesting the East India Company of its 
functions, and transferring them to Her Majesty’s 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 301 

Oovernment. For, under the existing system, 
Her Majesty’s Government have the deciding vote. 
The duty imposed upon the Court of Directors is 
to originate measures and frame drafts of instruc- 
tions. Even had they been remiss in this duty, 
their remissness, however discreditable to them- 
selves, could in no way absolve the responsibility 
of Her Majesty’s Government, since the Minister 
for India possesses, and has frequently exercised, 
the power of requiring that the Court of Directors 
should take any subject into consideration, and 
prepare a draft dispatch for his approval. Her 
Majesty’s Government are thus in the fullest sense 
accountable for all that has been done, and for all 
that has been forborne or omitted tr^e done. 
Your petitioners, on the other hand, are account- 
able only in so far as the act or omission has been 
promoted by themselves. 

That under these circumstances, if the adminis- 
tration of India had been a failure, it would, your 
petitioners submit, have been somewhat unreason- 
able to expect that a remedy would be found in 
annihilating the branch of the ruling authority 
which cotdd not be the one principally in fault, 
and might be altogether blameless, in order to 
concentrate all the powers in the branch which had 
necessarily the decisive share in every error, real 
or supposed. To believe that the administration 
of India would have been more free from error had 
it been conducted by a Minister of the Crown 
without the aid of the Court of Directors, would 
be to believe that the Minister, with full power to 
govern India as he pleased, has governed ill 
because he has bad the assistance of experienced 
and responsible advisers. 



302 EAST INDIA COMPANY 

That your petitioners, however, do not seek to 
vindicate themselves at the expense of any other 
authority. They claim their full share of the 
responsibility of the manner in which India has 
practically been governed. That responsibility is 
to them not a subject of humiliation but of pride. 
They are conscious that their advice and initiative 
have been, and have deserved to be, a great and 
potent element in the conduct of affairs in India, 
and they feel complete assurance that, the more 
attention is bestowed and the more light thrown 
upon India and its administration, the more evident 
it will become that the government in which they 
have borne a part has been not only one of the 
purest ii^utention, but one of the most beneficent 
in act, ever known among mankind ; that, during 
the last and present generation in particular, it 
has been, in all departments, one of the most 
rapidly improving governments in the world ; 
and that, at the time when this change is proposed, 
a greater number of important improvements are 
in a state of more rapid progress than at any 
former period. And they are satisfied that what- 
ever further improvements maybe hereafter effected 
in India can only consist in the development of 
germs already planted, and in building on founda- 
tions already laid, under their authority, and in a 
great measure by their express instructions. 

That such, however, is not the impression likely 
to be made on the public mind, either in England, 
or in India, by the ejection of your petitioners 
from the place they fill in the Indian administra- 
tion. It is not usual with statesmen to propose 
the complete abolition of a system of government, 
of which the practical operation is not condemned, 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 303 

and it might be generally inferred from the pro- 
posed measures, if carried into effect at the present 
time, that the East India Company, having 
been entrusted with an important portion of the 
administration of India, have so abused their 
trust as to have produced a sanguinary insurrec- 
tion, and nearly lost India to the British empire ; 
and that, having tlius crowned a long career of mis- 
government, they have, in deference to public 
indignation, been deservedly cashiered for their 
misconduct. 

That if the cliaracter of the East India Company 
were alone concerned, your petitioners might be 
willing to await the verdict of history. They are 
satisfied that posterity will do them justice. And 
they are confident that even now justice is done to 
them in the minds, not only of Her Majesty’s 
Ministers, but of all who have any claim to be 
competent judges of the subject. But, though your 
petitioners could afford to wait for the reversal of 
the verdict of condemnation which will be believed 
throughout the world to have been passed on them 
and their govermnent by the British nation, your 
petitioners cannot look without the deepest 
uneasiness at the effect likely to be produced on the 
minds of the people of India. To them, however 
incorrectly the name may express the fact, the 
British Government in India is the Government of 
the East India Company, To their minds the 
abolition of the Company will,^ for some time to 
come, mean the abolition of the whole system of 
administration with which the Company is iden- 
tified. The measure, introduced simultaneously 
with the influx of an overwhelming British force, 
will be coincident with a general outcry, in itself 



304 EAST INDIA COMPANY 

most alarming to their fears, from most of the 
organs of opinion in this country as well as of 
English opinion in India, denouncing the past 
policy of the Government on the express ground 
that it has been too forbearing and too considerate 
towards the natives. The people of India will at 
first feel no certainty that the new Government, or 
the Government under a new name, which it is 
proposed to introduce, will hold itself bound by the 
pledges of its predecessors. They will be slow 
to believe that a Government has been destroyed 
only to be followed by another which will act on the 
same principles and adhere to the same measures. 
They cannot suppose that the existing organ of 
administiifltion would be swept away without the 
intention of reversing any part of its policy. They 
will see the authorities, both at home and in India, 
surrounded by persons vehemently urging radical 
changes in many parts of that policy. And inter- 
preting, as they must do, the change in the 
instrument of government, as a concession to these 
opinions and feelings, they can hardly fail to 
believe that, whatever else may be intended, the 
Government will no longer be permitted to 
observe that strict impartiality between those who 
profess its own creed and those who hold the creeds 
of its native subjects which hitherto characterized 
it ; that their strongest and most deeply-rooted 
feelings will henceforth be treated with much less 
regard than heretofore ; and that a directly 
aggressive policy towards everything in their 
habits, or in their usages and customs, which 
Englishmen deem objectionable, will be no longer 
confined to individuals and private associations, 
but will be backed by all the power of Government. 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 305 

And here your petitioners think it important to 
observe, that in abstaining as they have done from 
all interference with any of the religious practices 
of the people of India, except such as are abhorrent 
to humanity, they have acted not only from their 
own conviction of what is just and expedient, but 
in accordance with the avowed intentions and 
express enactments of the legislature, framed ‘ in 
order that regard should be had to the civil and 
religious usages of the natives,’ and also that 
‘ suits, civil or criminal, against the natives,’ 
should be conducted according to such rules ‘ as 
may accommodate the same to the religion and 
manners of the natives.’ That their policy in this 
respect has been successful, is evidenced by the 
fact, that during a military mutiny, said to have 
been caused by unfounded apprehensions of danger 
to religion, the heads of the native states, and the 
masses of the population, have remained faithful 
to the British Government. Your petitioners 
need hardly observe how very different would pro- 
bably have been the issue of the late events, if the 
native princes, instead of aiding in the suppression 
of Jthe rebellion, had put themselves at its head, or 
if the general population had joined in the revolt ; 
and how probable it is that both these contingencies 
would have occurred, if any real ground had been 
given for the persuasion that the British Govern- 
ment intended to identify itself with proselytism. 
And it is the honest conviction of your petitioners 
that any serious apprehension of a change of policy 
in this respect would be likely to be followed, at 
no distant period, by a general rising throughout 
India. 

That your petitioners have seen with the greatest 



306 EAST INDIA COMPANY 

pain the demonstrations of indiscriminate ani- 
mosity towards the natives of India, on the part of 
our countrymen in India and at home, which have 
grown up since the late unhappy events. They 
believe these sentiments to be fundamentally 
unjust ; they know them to be fatal.to the possi- 
bility of good government in India. They feel 
that if such demonstrations should continue, and, 
especially if weight be added to them by legislating 
under their supposed influence, no amount of 
wisdom and forbearance on the part of the Govern- 
ment will avail to restore that confidence of the 
governed in the intentions of their rulers without 
which it is vain even to attempt the improvement 
of the piiople. 

That your petitioners cannot contemplate 
without dismay the doctrine now wid(dy promul- 
gated that India should be administered with an 
especial view to the benefit of the English who 
reside there ; or that in its administration any 
advantage should be sought for Her Majesty’s 
subjects of European birth, except that which they 
will necessarily derive from their superiority of 
intelligence, and from the increased prosperity of 
the people, the improvement of tlie productive 
resources of the country, and the extension of 
commercial intercourse. Your petitioners regard 
it as the most honourable characteristic of the 
government of India by England, that it has 
acknowledged no such distinction as that of 
a dominant and subject race ; but has held that 
its first duty was to the people of India. Your 
petitioners feel that a great portion of the hostility 
with which they are assailed, is caused by the 
belief that they are peculiarly the guardians of 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 307 

this principle, and that so long as they have any 
voice in the administration of India, it cannot 
easily be infringed. And your petitioners will not 
conceal their belief that their exclusion from any 
part in the government is likely, at the present 
time, to be regarded in India as a first successful 
attack on that principle. 

That your petitioners, therefore, most earnestly 
represent to your [Lordships’] Honourable House, 
that, even if the contemplated change could be 
proved to be in itself advisable, the present is a 
most unsuitable time for entertaining it ; and 
they most strongly and respectfully urge on your 
[Lordships’] Honourable House the expediency of 
at least deferring any such change untikit can be 
effected at a period when it would not be, in the 
minds of the people of India, directly connected 
with the recent calamitous events, and with the 
feelings to which tJiose events have either given 
rise or have afforded an opportunity of manifesta- 
tion. Such postponement, your petitioners submit, 
would allow time for a more mature consideration 
than has yet been given, or can be given in the 
present excited state of the public mind, to the 
various questions connected with the organization 
of a Government for India ; and would enable the 
most competent minds in the nation calmly to 
examine whether any new arrangement can be 
devised for the home Government of India, 
uniting a greater number of the conditions of 
good administration than the present ; and, if 80 , 
which among the numerous schemes which have 
been or may be proposed, possesses those requisites 
in the greatest degree. 

That your petitioners have always willingly 



m EAST INDIA COMPANY 

acquiesced in any changes which, after discussion by 
Parliament, were deemed conducive to the general 
welfare, although such changes may have in- 
volved important sacrifices to themselves. They 
would refer to their partial relinquishment of trade 
in 1813 ; to its total abandonment and the placing of 
their Commercial Charter in abeyance, in 1833; to 
the transfer to India of their commercial assets, 
amounting to £15,858,000, a sum greatly exceed- 
ing that ultimately repayable to them in respect of 
their capital, independent of territorial rights and 
claims ; and to their concurrence in 1853, in the 
measure by which the Court of Directors was 
reconstructed, and reduced to its present number. 
In the mijae spirit, your petitioners would gladly 
co-operate with Her Majesty’s Government in 
correcting any defects which may be considered 
to exist in the details of the present system ; and 
they would be prepared, without a murmur, to 
relinquish their trust altogether, if a better system 
for the control of the Government of India can be 
devised. But, as they believe that in the construc- 
tion of such a system there are conditions which 
cannot, without the most dangerous consequences, 
be departed from, your petitioners respectfully 
and deferentially submit to the judgement of your 
[Lordships’] Honourable House their view of those 
conditions, in the hope that if your [Lordships’] 
Honourable House should see reason to agree in 
that view, you, will withold your legislative 
sanction from any arrangement for the government 
in question in at least an equal degree with the 
present. 

That your petitioners may venture to assume 
that it will not be proposed to vest the home 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 309 

portion of the administration of India in a Minister 
of the Crown, without the adjunct of a Council 
composed of statesmen experienced in Indian 
affairs. Her Majesty’s Ministers cannot but be 
aware that the knowledge necessary for governing 
a foreign country, and in particular a country 
like India, requires as much special study as any 
other profession, and cannot possibly be possessed 
by any one who has not devoted a considerable 
portion of his life to the acquisition of it. 

That in constituting a body of experienced 
advisers to be associated with the Indian Minister, 
your petitioners consider it indispensable to bear 
in mind that this body should not only be qualified 
to advise the minister, but also, by its^wSvice, to 
exercise, to a certain degree, a moral check. 
It cannot be expected that the Minister, as a 
general rule, should himself know India ; while 
he will be exposed to perpetual solicitations from 
individuals and bodies, either entirely ignorant of 
that country, or knowing only enough of it to 
impose on those who know still less than them- 
selves, and having very frequently objects in view 
other than the interests or good government of 
India. The influences likely to be brought to bear 
on him through the organs of popular opinion will, 
in the majority of cases, be equally misleading. 
The public opinion of England, itself necessarily 
unacquainted with Indian affairs, can only follow 
the promptings of those who taj:e most pains to 
influence it, and these will generally be such as 
have some private interest to serve. It is, there- 
fore, your petitioners submit, of the utmost im- 
portance that any Council which may form a part 
of the Home Government of India should derive 



310 


EAST INDIA COMPANY 


sufficient weight from its constitution, and from 
the relation it occupies to the Minister, to be a 
substantial barrier against those inroads of self- 
interest and ignorance in this country from which 
the Government of India has hitherto been com- 
paratively free, but against which it would be 
too much to expect that Parliament should of 
itself afford a sufficient protection. 

That your petitioners cannot well conceive a 
worse form of government for India than a Minister 
with a Council whom he should be at liberty to 
consult or not at his pleasure, or whose advice he 
should be able to disregard, without giving his 
reasons in writing, and in a manner likely to carry 
convictiiP^iv Such an arrangement, your petitioners 
submit, would be really liable to the objections, in 
their opinion, erroneously urged against the present 
system. Your petitioners respectfully represent 
that any body of persons associated with the 
Minister, which is not a check, will be a screen. 
Unless the Council is so constituted as to be 
personally independent of the Minister, unless it 
feels itself responsible for recording an opinion on 
every Indian subject, and pressing that opinion on 
the Minister, whether it is agreeable to him or not ; 
and unless the Minister, when he overrules their 
opinion, is bound to record his reasons, their 
existence will only serve to weaken his responsi- 
bilities and to give the colourable sanction of pru- 
dence and experifmce to measures in the framing 
of which those qualities have had no share. 

That it would be vain to expect that a new 
Council could have as much moral influence, and 
power of asserting its opinion with effect, as the 
Court of Directors. A new body can no more 



^ PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 311 

succeed to the feelings and authority which their 
antiquity and historical antecedents give to the 
East India Company, than a legislature under a 
new name, sitting in Westminster, would have the 
moral ascendancy of the Houses of Lords and 
Commons. One of the most important elements of 
usefulness will thus he necessarily wanting in any 
newly constituted Indian Council, as compared 
with the present. 

That your petitioners find it difficult to conceive 
that the same independence in judgement and act, 
which characterizes the Court of Directors, will be 
found in any Council all of whose Members are 
nominated by the Crown. Owing their nomina- 
tion to the same authority, many of theiuppfobably 
to the same individual Minister, whom they are 
appointed to check, and looking to him alone for 
their reappointment, theii- desire of recommending 
themselves to him and their unwillingness to risk 
his displeasure by any serious resistance to his 
wishes, will be motives too strong not to be in 
danger of exercising a powerful and injurious 
influence over their conduct. Nor are your 
petitioners aware of any mode in which that 
injurious influence could be guarded against, 
except by conferring the appointments, like those 
of the judges, during good behaviour ; which, by 
rendering it impossible to correct an error once 
committed, would be seriously objectionable. 

That your petitioners are equaUy unable to see 
how, if the controlling body is nominated by the 
Minister, that happy independence of Parlia- 
mentary and party influence, which has hitherto 
distinguished the administration of India and the 
appointment to situations of trust and importance 



312 . 


EAST INDIA COMPANY 


in that country, can be expected to continue. 
Your petitioners believe that in no Government 
known to history have appointments to offices, and 
especially to high offices, been so rarely bestowed 
on any other considerations than those of personal 
fitness. This characteristic, but for which in all 
probability India would long since have been lost 
to this country, is, your petitioners conceive, 
entirely owing to the circumstance that the 
dispensers of patronage have been persons un- 
connected with party, and under no necessity of 
conciliating Parliamentary support ; that, con- 
sequently, the appointments to offices in India have 
been, as a rule, left to the unbiassed judgement 
of the IfKbittl authorities ; while the nominations to 
the civil and military services have been generally 
bestowed on the middle classes, irrespective of 
political considerations, and, in a large proportion, 
on the relatives of persons who had distinguished 
themselves by their services in India. 

That your petitioners, therefore, think it essen- 
tial that at least a majority of the Council which 
assists the Minister for India with its advice, 
should hold their seats independently of his 
appointment. 

That it is, in the opinion of your petitioners, no 
less necessary that the order of the transaction of 
business should be such as to make the participa- 
tion of the Council in the administration of India 
a substantial on^.. That to this end, it is, in the 
opinion of your petitioners, indispensable that the 
dispatches to India should not be prepared by the 
Minister and laid before the Council, but should be 
prepared by the Council and submitted to the 
Minister. This would be in accordance with the 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 313 

natural and obvious principle that persons chosen 
for their knowledge of a subject should suggest the 
mode of dealing with it, instead of merely giving 
their opinion on suggestions coming from else- 
where. This is also the only mode in which the 
Members of the Council can feel themselves 
sufficiently important or sufficiently responsible 
to secure their applying their minds to the subjects 
before them. It is almost unnecessary for your 
petitioners to observe, that the mind is called into 
far more vigorous action by being required to 
propose than by being merely called on to assent. 
The Minister has necessarily the ultimate decision. 
If he has also the initiative, he has all the powers 
which are of any practical moment. body, 
whose only recognized function was to find fault, 
would speedily let that function fall into desuetude. 
They would feel that their co-operation in con- 
ducting the government of India was not really 
desired ; that they were only felt as a clog on the 
wheels of business. Their criticism on what had 
been decided without their being collectively con- 
sulted would be felt as importunate, as a mere 
delay and impediment ; and their office would 
probably be seldom sought by those who were 
willing to allow its most important duties to 
become nominal. 

That with the duty of preparing the dispatches 
to India, would naturally be combined the nomina- 
tion and control of the home establishments. This 
your petitioners consider absolutely essential to 
the utility of the Council. If the officers through 
whom they work are in direct dependence upon 
an authority higher than theirs, all matters of 
importance will in reality be settled between the 



BU EA8T INDIA COMPANY 

Minister and the subordinates, passing over the 
Council altogether. 

That a third consideration, to which your 
petitioners attach great importance, is, that the 
number of the Council should not be too restricted. 
India is so wide a field, that a practical acquaint- 
ance with every part of its affairs cannot be found 
combined in any small number of individuals. The 
Council ought to contain men of general experience 
and knowledge of the world ; also men specially 
qualified by financial and revenue experience, by 
judicial experience, diplomatic experience, military 
experience. It ought to contain persons con- 
versant with the varied social relations and varied 
institutMcsv'i of Bengal, Madras, Bombay, the North 
Western Provinces, tlie Punjab, and the native 
states. Even the present Court of Directors, 
reduced as it is in numbers by the Act of 1853, 
does not contain all the vaiieties of knowledge and 
experience desirable in such a body. Neither, 
your petitioners submit, would it be safe to limit 
the number to that which would be strictly 
sufficient, supposing all the appointments to be 
the best possible. A certain margin should be 
allowed for failures, which, even with the most 
conscientious selection, will sometimes occur. 
Your petitioners, moreover, cannot overlook the 
possibility that, if the nomination takes place by 
Ministers at the head of a political party, it will 
not always be njade with exclusive reference to 
personal qualifications ; and it is indispensable to 
provide that such eiTors or faults in the nominating 
authority, so long as they are only occasional, shall 
not seriously impair the efficiency of the body. 

That while these considerations plead strongly 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 315 

for a body not less numerous than the present, 
even if only regarded as advisers of the Minister, 
their other office, as a check on the Minister, forms, 
your petitioners submit, a no less forcible objection 
to any considerable reduction of the present 
number. A body of six or eight will not be equal 
to one of eighteen, in that feeling of independent 
self-reliance which is necessary to induce a public 
body to press its opinion on a Minister to whom 
that opinion is unacceptable. However unobjec- 
tionably in other respects so small a body may be 
constituted, reluctance to give offence will be 
likely, unless in extreme cases, to be a stronger 
habitual inducement in their minds than the desire 
to stand up for their convictions. 

That if, in the opinion of your [Lordships’] 
Honourable House, a body can be constituted 
which unites the above enumerated requisites of 
good government in a greater degree than the 
Court of Directors, your petitioners have only to 
express their humble hope that your endeavours 
for that purpose may be successful. But if, in 
enumerating the conditions of a good system of 
home government for India, your petitioners have 
in fact enumerated the qualities possessed by 
the present system, then your petitioners pray 
that your [Lordships’] Honourable House will 
continue the existing powers of the Court of 
Directors. 

That your petitioners are aware^that the present 
Home Government of India is reproached with 
being a double Government ; and that any 
arrangement by which an independent check is 
provided to the discretion of the Minister will be 
liable to a similar reproach. But they conceive 



316 EAST INDIA COMPANY 

that this accusation originates in an entire mis- 
conception of the functions devolving on the 
Home Government of India, and in the applica- 
tion to it of the principles applicable to purely 
executive departments. The Executive Govern- 
ment of India is, and must be, seated in India 
itself. The Court of Directors is not so much an 
executive as a deliberative body. Its principal 
function, and that of the Home Government 
generally, is not to direct the details of administra- 
tion, but to scrutinize and revise the past acts of 
the Indian Government ; to lay down principles, 
and issue general instructions for their future 
guidance, and to give or refuse sanction to great 
politic#*^aeasures, which are referred home for 
approval. These duties are more analogous to the 
functions of Parliament, than to those of an 
Executive Board ; and it might almost as well be 
said that Parliament, as that the Government of 
India, should be constituted on the principles 
applicable to Executive Boards. It is considered 
an excellence, not a defect, in the constitution of 
Parliament, to be not merely a double but a triple 
Government. An executive authority, your 
petitioners submit, may often with advantage be 
single, because promptitude is its first requisite. 
But the function of passing a deliberate opinion on 
past measures, and laying down principles of future 
policy, is a business which, in the estimation of 
your petitioners, admits of, and requires the 
concurrence of more judgements than one. It is 
no defect in such a body to be double, and no excel- 
lence to be single ; especially when it can only be 
made so by cutting off that branch of it which by 
previous training is always the best prepared, and 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 317 

often the only one wliich is prepared at all, for 
its peculiar duty. 

That your petitioners have heard it asserted 
that, in consequence of what is called the double 
Government, the Indian authorities are less 
responsible to Parliament and the nation, than 
other departments of the Government of the 
empire, since it is impossible to know on which of 
the two branches of Home Government the re- 
sponsibility ought to rest. Your petitioners 
fearlessly affirm, that this impression is not only 
groundless, but the very reverse of the truth. The 
Home Government of India is not less, but more 
responsible, than any other branch of the adminis- 
tration of the State ; inasmuch as the Jsesident 
of the Board of Commissioners, who is the Minister 
for India, is as completely responsible as any other 
of Her Majesty’s ministers, and in addition, his 
advisers also are responsible. It is always certain, 
in the case of India, that the President of the Board 
of Commissioners must have either commanded or 
sanctioned all that has been done. No more than 
this, your petitioners submit, can be known in the 
case of the head of any department of Her Majesty’s 
Government. For it is not, nor can it rationally 
be supposed, that any Minister of the Crown is 
without trusted advisers ; and the Minister for 
India must, for obvious reasons, be more dependent 
than any other of Her Majesty’s Ministers upon 
the advice of persons whose lives have been 
devoted to the subject on which *their advice has 
been given. But in the case of India, such advisers 
are assigned to him by the constitution of the 
Government, and they are as much responsible for 
what they advise as he for what he ordains ; 



318 EAST INDiA COMPANY 

while in other departments the Minister’s only 
official advisers are the subordinates in his office 
— men often of great skill and experience, but not 
in the public eye ; often unknown to the public 
even by name ; official reserve precludes the 
possibility of ascertaining what advice they give, 
and they are responsible only to the Minister 
himself. By what application of terms this can 
be called responsible government, and the joint 
government of your petitioners and the India 
Board an irresponsible government, your petitioners 
think it unnecessary to ask. 

That, without knowing the plan on which Her 
Majesty’s Ministers contemplate the transfer to 
the Crc^wiiJ of the servants of the Ck)mpany, your 
petitioners find themselves unable to approach 
the delicate question of the Indian army, further 
than to point out that the high military qualities 
of the officers of that army have unquestionably 
sprung in a great degree from its being a principal 
and substantive army, holding Her Majesty’s 
commissions and enjoying equal rank with Her 
Majesty’s officers, and your petitioners would 
earnestly deprecate any change in that position. 

That your petitioners, having regard to all these 
considerations, humbly pray your Honourable 
House that you will not give your sanction to any 
change in the constitution of the Indian Govern- 
ment during the continuance of the present 
unhappy disturbances, nor without a full previous 
inquiry into the operations of the present system. 
And your petitioners further pray that this 
inquiry may extend to every ‘ department of 
Indian administration. Such an inquiry your 
petitioners respectfully claim, not only as a matter 



PETITION TO PARLIAMENT, 1858 319 

of justice to themselves, but because, when, for 
the first time in this century, the thoughts of 
every public man in this country are fixed on 
India, an inquiry would be more thorough, and 
its results would carry much more instruction to 
the mind of Parliament and of the country, than 
at any preceding period. 

25. Viscount Palmerston, House of Commons, 
12 February 185S 

I RISE, sir, in pursuance of the notice which has 
been given by Her Majesty’s Government, to ask 
leave to introduce a Bill of first rate importance. 
I rise to ask leave to introduce a BillJ^ trans- 
ferring from the East India Company to the Crown 
the government of Her Majesty’s East Indian 
dominions. In making that proposal I feel myself 
bound, in the first place, to say that I do not do 
it in any spirit of hostility to the East India 
Company, or as meaning thereby to imply any 
blame or censure upon the administration of India 
under that corporation. I believe the East India 
Company has done many good things in India. 
I believe that its administration has been attended 
with great advantage to the population under its 
rule. And it is not on the ground of any delin- 
quency on the part of the Company, but on 
the ground of the inconvenience and injurious 
character of the existing arrangements, that I pro- 
pose this measure to the House. It is perhaps one 
of the most extraordinary facts in the history of 
mankind that these British Islands should have 
acquired such an extensive dominion in a remote 
part of the globe as that which we exercise over 



320 VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 * 

the continent of India. It is indeed remarkable 
that those regions, in which science and art may 
be said to have first dawned upon mankind, should 
now be subject to the rule of a people inhabiting 
islands which, at a time when these eastern regions 
enjoyed as high a civilization and as ^reat pros- 
perity as that age could offer, were in a state of 
utter barbarism. That is a remarkable circum- 
stance ; but still more remarkable is it that these 
extensive dominions should have been gained not 
by the power of a nation as a nation, but by an 
association of individuals, by a mercantile commu- 
nity, supported, indeed, to a certain degree by the 
power and resources of their country, but mainly 
in f nr success to their own energy and 
enterprise. These two circumstances are un- 
doubtedly singular in the history of the world, but 
it is quite as remarkable, quite as singular, that a 
nation like this, in which the science of govern- 
ment is perhaps better understood than in any 
other, in which the principle of popular representa- 
tion has so long been established, sho^d have 
deliberately consigned to the care of a small body 
of commercial men the management of such 
extensive territories, such vast interests, and such 
numerous populations. One could easily imagine 
that a wild!erness in the northern part of America, 
where nothing lives except fur-bearing animals 
and a few wild Indians but little removed from the 
lower creation, might be confined to a company 
whose chief fu'hctions should be to strip the 
running animals of their fur, and to keep the bipeds 
sober ; but that a great country like this should 
deliberately consign to the management of a mere 
commercial company, of a set of irresponsible 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 321 

individuals, a great territory, occupied by different 
races, professing divers religions, and should place 
in their hands the determination of all the questions 
of peace and war and of international relations 
with independent princes, which must necessarily 
arise, is, I believe, a circumstance unexampled in 
the history of mankind. But this country never 
designedly did any such thing. The existing state 
of things grew up gradually from a very small 
beginning. The original settlers began with a 
factory, the factory grew into a fort, the fort ex- 
panded to a district, and the district to a province, 
and then came collisions with less civilized neigh- 
bours, injuries to be resented, attacks to be 
repelled, and conflicts which alwaysj^wided in 
victory and extension of territory. So, gradually, 
from one transaction to another, grew up that 
state of things in which the East India Company 
found itself invested with vast commercial privi- 
leges and with most important political functions. 
This state of things continued up to the year 1784, 
when there was an infusion of responsibility in 
respect of its political administrative functions into 
the affairs of the Company by the establishment 
of the Board of Control. Matters went on under 
this new arrangement for a number of years, during 
which the Company continued, subject to a slight 
interference from the Board of Control, to dis- 
charge its political functions, and at the same time 
to exercise all its commercial ri^ts. One would 
have imagined that in a country like this that first 
step would have been followed up ; that before 
anything else was done the reflective British 
nation would have* pursued the course inaugurated 
in 1784, and that, as the effect of the measure then 



322 VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 

adopted was to limit to a certain degree the 
political functions of the Company, the next step 
would have been to take them away altogether, 
and to leave the Company in its original position 
as a trading association. However, it happens 
that in this country commercial nc\atters often 
attract more attention and excite deeper interest 
than political affairs, and the next step was, not 
to meddle further with the political functions of 
the Company, but to take away all the commercial 
privileges which originally constituted the founda- 
tion of its existence. Accordingly, in the year 
1833 tlie Company altogether ceased to be a 
commercial association, and became, one may say, 
but a phantom of its original body. It lost the 
commercial character for which it was originally 
founded, and continued to be merely a political 
instrument, by means of which the administration 
of India was carried on. Now, sir, I venture to 
think that the arrangement so made was a most 
inconvenient and • most cumbrous arrangement. 
The principle of our political system is that all 
administrative functions should be accompanied 
by Ministerial responsibility — responsibility to 
Parliament, responsibility to public opinion, re- 
sponsibility to the Crown; but in this case the 
chief functions in the government of India are 
committed to a body not responsible to Parlia- 
ment, not appointed by the Crown, but elected by 
persons who have no more connexion with India 
than consists in the simple possession of so much 
India Stock. I think that that of itself is a most 
objectionable arrangement. In this country we 
are slow to make changes. The indisposition to 
make changes is wise and useful. As a general 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 323 

principle it is wise, and nations do themselves 
great mischief by rapid and ill-considered altera- 
tions of their institutions. But equally unwise 
and equally injurious is it to cling to existing 
arrangements simply because they exist, and not to 
admit changes which can be made with advantage 
to the nation. What can be more cumbrous than 
the existing system of Indian administration 
which is called by the name of the ‘ double Oovern- 
ment ’ ? In the debates of 1853, when the last 
India Bill was passed, the right hon. gentleman 
the Member for Buckinghamshire (Mr. Disraeli) 
asked who was the Government of India, and to 
whom he was to look as the authority responsible 
for the administration of that vast emi^Qi Why, 
sir, there is no responsibility, or rather there is a 
conflict of responsibility. The Directors possess 
a power paramount, as the right hon. gentleman 
said, to everything else, the power of recalling the 
Governor-General, by which any great system of 
policy may be at once interrupted. And they have 
this power, although the Governor-General muSt 
have been appointed by the Crown, and the ap- 
pointment sanctioned by the Directors. The func- 
tions of Government and the responsibility have 
been divided between the Directors, the Board 
of Control, and the Governor- General in India ; 
the Board of Control representing the government 
of the day, responsible to this House, responsible 
to public opinion, appointed by^the Crown, and 
exercising functions delegated by it ; the Court 
of Directors, elected by the gentlemen and ladies 
who happen to be holders of India Stock, many of 
whom are totally ignorant of everything relating 
to Indian interests, and perhaps knowing nothing 



324 VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 

about Calcutta, Bombay, or Madras, except what 
they learn from the candidates for the directorship 
as to the presidency to which the cadetship is to 
belong which is promised in return for their votes. 
The directors are undoubtedly, in general, men of 
great experience and knowledge of In^a, but they 
are elected by a body of persons who have no 
peculiar faculty for choosing persons qualified to 
govern a great empire in the East. Then comes 
the Governor- General, invested with great, sepa- 
rate, and independent powers, and among these 
three authorities it is obvious that dispatch and 
unity of purpose can hardly by possibility exist. 
I won’t trouble the House by going into a detailed 
explanatis;! of the method in which business is 
done, because it is very well known to those hon. 
Members who have given their attention to Indian 
affairs, that before a dispatch upon the most im- 
portant matter can go out to India it has to oscil- 
late between Cannon Row and the India House ; 
that it is proposed by one party, altered by the 
other, altered again by the first, and sent back to 
the other ; and that the adventures of a dispatch 
between these two extreme points of the metro- 
polis are often as curious as those Adventures of a 
Guinea of which we have all read. It is obvious 
that this system of check and counter-check must 
be attended with great inconvenience to the public 
service, and be productive of great delay. Take, 
for example, a bo^dy of twenty gentlemen generally 
agreeing in their views, and make ten of them sit 
at the east end of the town and the other ten in 
Westminster. Propose to them any question of 
average difficulty and importance, and the pro- 
bability is that the two parties will come to 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 326 

different conclusions, not being able to exchange 
opinions and arguments and to arrive at a common 
result. So it is with the Board of Control and the 
Court of Directors. The result in cases of material 
difference must necessarily be a middle term, 
satisfying the opinions of neither, carrying into 
effect the principle of neither, unsatisfactory there- 
fore to both, and probably less advantageous to 
the public service than the opinion of either would 
have been had it been entirely adopted. There- 
fore I say that this system of check and counter- 
check may be carried too far. There is no doubt 
that certain checks are requisite in every political 
machine ; but you may multiply your checks and 
counter-checks to such an extent that t^functions 
of the machine, which are intended only to be 
controlled, are paralysed for every useful purpose. 
Then what, let me ask, is the position in which 
Her Majesty’s Government stand in this House ? 
When Indian questions are discussed, it is the 
constant habit of those who take part in the debate, 
criticizing and impugning what has been done, to 
hold Her Majesty’s Government responsible for 
everything that occurs. But Her Majesty’s Govern- 
ment cannot be fairly answerable for things over 
which they have not a perfect control, and which 
they cannot entirely direct. It frequently happens, 
indeed, that the Government of the day are made 
responsible for acts which were done without their 
consent, and probably in some cases much to their 
dissatisfaction. Take, for instance, a matter which 
has occupied the attention of the House, and which 
is to form part of the inquiries of the Committee 
which has been recently chosen — the hiring of ves- 
sels to carry troops to India. I will venture to say 



326 VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 

that a majority of hon. gentlemen here imagine that 
the Government is the authority by which those 
arrangements are made. Not in the least. The 
East India Company is chargeable with the expense 
of transporting troops to India ; it is the Company 
which takes up the ships, and not the Government ; 
and, though the opinion of the Government must 
naturally have weight with the Company, these 
arrangements are not made by the officers of the 
Government, but by the officers of the East India 
Company itself. I say, then, it is most desirable 
that this complicated machine should be simplified 
and reduced in fact and form to that which it is 
imagined to be, but which it practically is not. 
I may bi^^sked why we take this moment for 
proposing a change of system. The inconveniences 
of different systems of administration are forced 
upon the attention of the Government and the 
country from time to time by peculiar emergencies. 
Thus the arrangements of the military departments 
had existed in time of peace', but, though many 
felt that the division of the Ordnance into separate 
departments and the distinction between the War 
Office and the office of the Secretary of State for 
War were inconvenient, it was not until the war in 
the Crimea made the Government more directly 
sensible of the disadvantages of that complicated 
system that we altered the arrangements, and it 
was by means of the alterations carried out during 
the Crimean war that the consolidation was effected, 
by means of whicli we were enabled to carry on the 
struggle with Russia with far greater promptitude, 
vigour, and success than we should have been able 
to do if the old system had been continued. I say, 
then, that as far as regards the executive functions 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 327 

of the Indian Government at home, it is of the 
greatest importance to vest complete authority 
where the public have a right to think that com- 
plete responsibility should rest, and that, whereas 
in this country there can be but one governing 
body responsible to the Crown, to Parliament, and 
to public opinion, consisting of the constitutional 
advisers of the Crown for tlie time being, so it is 
in accordance with the principles and practice of 
our constitution, as it would be in accordance with 
the best interests of the nation, that India, with all 
its vast and important interests, should be placed 
under the direct authority of the Crown, to be 
governed in the name of the Crown by the re- 
sponsible Ministers of the Crown sittii;^i5L Parlia- 
ment, and responsible to Parliament anothe public 
for every part of their public conduct, instead of 
being, as now, mainly administered by a set of 
gentlemen who, however respectable, however 
competerit for the discharge of the functions 
entrusted to them, are yet a totally irresponsible 
body, whose views and acts are seldom Known to 
the public, and whether known or unknown, 
whetW approved or disapproved, unless one of 
the Directors happens to have a seat in the House, 
are out of the range of Parliamentary discussion. 
Again, as regards bur interests in India, I may 
state at once that the Bill which I am about to 
propose to the House is confined entirely and 
solely to a change in the administrative organiza- 
tion at home, and that we do nftt intend to make 
any alteration in the existing arrangements in 
India. In fact, if Parliament were to adopt the 
measure which we are about to propose, the only 
difference, as far as India is concerned, would be, 



m VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 

that the next dispatch would go out signed by the 
President and the Council for Indian afEairs, instead 
of by the Court of Directors, and that the reply 
would be addressed to the President of the new 
Board, instead of to the Chairman of the body 
sitting in Leadenhall Street. Now, I believe there 
can be no doubt that, so far as the impression on 
the minds of the people of India is concerned, the 
name of the Sovereign of a great empire like this 
must be far more respected, far more calculated to 
produce moral and political impressions, than the 
name of a Company of merchants, however 
respectable and able they may be. We have to 
deal, in that country, with Princes, some ruling 
indepencj^tly and some in a state of modified 
dependence upon us, and with feudal chiefs proud 
of their position, cherishing traditionary recollec- 
tions of a wide empire, and of great Sovereigns to 
whom their ancestors owed allegiance. How can 
we expect such men to feel any great respect for a 
mere Company of merchants ? The respect they 
feel, the allegiance they yield, would be increased 
tenfold if the one were given and the other tendered 
to the Sovereign of a great and mighty empire. 
I believe, in fact, that what gives force to the 
Company in India is not the fame or authority 
of the Company itself, but the knowledge which 
the people have that behind the Company, and 
strengthening it, is the power of the British empire, 
and that, although the ruler may be an officer of a 
commercial assocfation in name, tlie real power 
which they have to look up to is the power of the 
Sovereign of this great country. I am, therefore, 
satisfied that the transfer of the government of 
India to the Crown would, as far as its effect upon 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 32f 

the people of India is concerned, be equivalent to 
a large reinforcement of troops ; tliat the impression 
which would be produced would be most advan- 
tageous, and would tend to consolidate and 
strengthen the moral and political influence of 
England in these vast regions of the world. What, 
then, is the arrangement which we are about to 
propose ? We wish to alter things as little as we 
can consistently with the great object which we 
have in view. That object is to make the respon- 
sible advisers of the Crown answerable for the 
government of India as well for that of all other 
possessions of the Crown beyond seas. We wish 
that the aflairs of India should be administered by 
Ministers responsible to Parliament fo^iQ manner 
in which that country is governed. We propose, 
therefore, that the functions of the Court of Di- 
rectors, and, of course, of the Court of Proprietors, 
shall cease ; that there shall be substituted for 
those bodies a President, assisted by a Council for 
the Affairs of India ; that that President, of course, 
shall be a member of the Government, and shall 
be the organ of the Cabinet with reference to all 
matters relating to India ; but, as men who have 
distinguished themselves in public life in this 
country, and who are likely from time to time, as 
changes of administration occur, to be placed at 
the head of that department, cannot be supposed 
to possess that detailed local knowledge which is 
essential to the wise government of the country, 
we propose that the President*shall be assisted 
by a Council composed of persons named by the 
Crown, with the condition that they shall either 
have been Directors of the East India Company, 
have served for a certain period in India either in 
M 3 



330 VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 

a civil pr military capacity, or have resided there a 
certain number of years unconnected with the 
local administration. We propose that that 
Council shall consist of eight members, that the 
rpembers shall be appointed for eight years, and 
that two shall retire by rotation every second year, 
in order that successive administrations may have 
the means of renewing the Council from time to 
time by the introduction of persons returning 
from India with fresh knowledge and ideas. We 
think that while, on the one hand, the permanency 
of a Councillor for eight years will make him an 
independent adviser of the President, he will not 
on the other, by being appointed for life, block up 
the way;t(^the accession of other persons who may 
from time to time appear more capable of serving 
the country. Of course, as. the proposal is to 
transfer to the Government of the day full re- 
sponsibility for the management of Indian affairs, 
and as the President will be the organ of the Cabinet 
upon Indian matters, just as the Secretary of State 
for the Colonies and the Secretary of State for 
Foreign Affairs are the organs of the Government 
in regard to the departments under their respective 
care, the decision of the President must be final 
in all matters which may be treated of in the 
Council. But, nevertheless, we propose that, if the 
Councillors differ in opinion from the President, 
they shall have the right to record that difference, 
together with their reasons, upon the Minutes of the 
Council, so as to be able to justify themselves after- 
wards for the advice they have given. The full 
power of the President, however, will not extend to 
matters involving increased expense to the Indian 
revenue ; and, for purposes of that sort, it will be 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 331 

necessary that he shall have the concurrence of 
four Councillors to any proposals which he may 
have to submit. In the temporary absence of the 
President a Secretary of State will be able to act 
for him, and four members of the Council will be a 
quorum for the transaction of business. We pro- 
pose that the Council shall have the power of 
distributing among themselves the business which 
comes to them, so as to allot different departments 
of business to different Members of Council, who 
will, of course, make reports to the Council itself. 
We propose that the President shall be placed on 
the footing of a Secretary of State, and that the 
Councillors shall have a salary of £1,000 a year 
each. We propose that all powers noir- vested in 
the Court of Directors shall be transferred to this 
Council, and therefore, that all appointments 
which have hitherto been made by the Court of 
Directors or by other parties subject to the appro- 
bation of the Crown, shall be made by the Crown 
direct, but that all appointments in India which 
have hitherto been made by the local authorities 
shall continue to be made by those authorities ; 
so that no part of the local Indian patronage will 
be transferred to the Government of this country. 
We propose that the President shall be able to 
appoint one Secretary, who shall be capable of 
sitting in this House. It will be convenient that a 
Cabinet Minister holding that situation shall have 
the assistance of a Secretary coijversant with the 
business which may come under discussion ; but 
we do not propose that the Councillors shall be 
capable of sitting in Parliament. We think there 
would be great inconvenience in such an arrange- 
ment ; that they would become party men ; that 



m VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 

they would necessarily associate with one side or 
the other in this House, and that, with changes of 
Administration, the relations between the Presi- 
dent and the Councillors might then become 
exceedingly embarrassing. One point which has 
always attracted the attention of those who have 
considered these matters, and which ‘has created 
even a very considerable constitutional difficulty, 
in any attempt to decide what would be the best 
system of Government for India, has been the 
question of patronage. Many men have said that 
they think the ‘ double Government ’ a cumbrous 
and antiquated machine, which ought to be done 
away with. That was the opinion in 1853 of a great 
number *of^^hose hon. gentlemen who took part in 
the discussion, but it was always said ‘ How can we 
manage with the patronage ? We do not wish to 
increase the patronage of the Government, and 
we fear that this transfer of power would greatly 
augment the patronage of the Home Govern- 
ment.’ Now, I have already said with regard to 
local appointments, all these appointments which 
have hitherto been made either by the Governor- 
General or by other authorities in India, will 
continue exactly as before to* be made by them, 
the members of the local Council being named 
by the Governor-General instead of being named 
hence. An arrangement was made in 1853 by 
which all appointments to writerships were given 
up to open competition. That arrangement we 
shall of course maintain. Writerships, therefore, 
are beyond the range of patronage. The appoint- 
ments to cadetships have hitherto been divided 
between members of the Court of Directors and 
the Presidents of the Board of Control. What we 



VISCOUNT PALMEESTON, 1858 333 

propose is to leave the appointments to those 
cadetships as they have been hitherto. The 
reduction from the number of Directors to the 
number of Councillors will give somewhat more 
patronage to the Councillors, but the addition to 
the patronage of the President will be hardly 
perceptible. It must be remembered that hitherto 
we have had an enormous native army, and it does 
not seem probable that, for the future, we shall 
keep up that force at the same strength. As 
regards the civil appointments, they will remain 
matters of public competition, and as regards 
appointments to cadetships, they will be made, as 
I have stated, with, probably, the additional 
condition that the cadets shall be ^pointed to 
probation in some military College, their final 
appointments to regiments depending on the 
efficiency of their studies. There is one condition 
which we propose to attach to this distribution of 
cadetships — viz. that a certain proportion of first 
appointments, which we cannot fix in a Bill, but 
which must be left to the discretion of the Council 
from time to time, shall be reserved for the sons of 
civil and military officers who have served in 
India. According to that arrangement it will be 
seen that no addition of patronage will devolve 
upon the Executive Government of an amount 
which need excite the least constitutional jealousy 
on the part of the House of Commons. The army 
in India will consist, as heretofore, of Queen’s 
troops, forming part of the regillar army of this 
country, and local corps enlisted and confined to 
service in India. With regard to Queen’s troops 
no change will be made. With regard to the others, 
they will be transferred to the Crown from the 



384 VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 

service of the Company, subject to the same 
conditions 'of service as those under which they are 
enlisted, and if they dislike that change I think in 
common justice, they will be entitled to their 
discharge. It is proposed with regard to local 
military services, that the troops shall be paid 
out of the revenues of India, and that their services 
shall be limited to Asia so long as they are paid out 
of the Indian revenue. At present, I believe, the 
range of service for the Company’s troops is co- 
extensive with the limits of the Company’s 
charter, as far as any place eastward of the Cape. 
It is proposed that, if at any time a part of the 
local army shall be employed out of Asia, the 
troops sh^ then not be paid out of the Indian 
revenue. It will be left for this House to determine 
whether a force so employed shall be paid out of 
the revenue of this country, and whether their 
employment is consonant with what the interests 
of India may be. This will be a sufficient check 
against the employment of the Indian troops 
without the consent of Parliament. It is proposed 
that, whereas we transfer to this President of the 
Council the functions of the Court of Directors, and 
Board of Control, both of which will be abolished, 
the functions and powers of the Secret Committee, 
which govern matters involving great discretion 
and temporary secrecy, should be vested in the 
President, as representative of the responsible 
Minister of the Crown. But we propose that, in 
any case in whicTfi orders shall be sent to India 
involving the immediate commencement of hos- 
tilities, communications thereof shall be made to 
Parliament within one month, if Parliament be 
then sitting, or within one month after Parliament 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 336 

shall next meet. That interval will allow a 
sufficient time to elapse to prevent injury to the 
public service from the too early publication of 
orders so issued ; while it will, at the same time*, 
give Parliament an early opportuniiy of calling 
upon the Government for explanation of the causes 
which had led to such orders. Of course, it will be 
necessary that there should be an effective audit of 
the revenues of India and their application. It is 
required by this Bill that the revenue shall be 
applied solely for tlie purpose of government in 
India. It is proposed that an auditor shall be 
appointed, with the power of appointing assistant 
auditors, for the purpose of examining minutely 
the accounts of receipts and expenditujjp of Indian 
revenue, and that the accounts, when audited, 
shall be laid before Parliament for its consideration. 
Of course, power will be given to the President of 
the Council to issue to the Company such sums as 
may be necessary to defray the expenditure re- 
quired for paying their dividends and keeping 
their books, until the Company determine whether 
they will or will not avail themselves of the option 
given them of being paid in a certain time for their 
stock. This then, sir, is, generally speaking, the 
outline of our measure. Of course, the details will 
come under the consideration of the House, if it 
should, as I trust’it will, give us leave to bring in 
the Bill ; and when the Bill shall be in the hands of 
hon. members, they will then have to consider the 
details, such as I have described, as well as some 
other points, to which I have not thought it 
necessary to advert. But the question now to be 
considered is simply the great and large ques- 
tion, whether or not we shall transfer to the 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 

executive and responsible Ministers of the Crown 
the direction of the affairs of our Indian territories, 
or whether that direction shall be left, as here- 
tofore, under the cumbrous and complicated 
system described as the ‘ double government 
which, in my opinion, is full of embarrassment, 
and not calculated to accomplish the purposes 
good government ought to have in view, and which, 
though continued heretofore, because no great 
events have called on Parliament to reconsider 
it, ought, 1 think, to be abolished without further 
delay. Now, I do not think I shall be met by any 
objections to this principle itself, because, when I 
recollect what has passed on former occasions in 
this Hous^^ and when I know what is the general 
opinion of the country on the point, I cannot 
persuade myself that we shall meet with any 
strong opposition to the general principle on which 
the measure is founded. Wlien I look back to 
what passed in 1853, I find some of the leading 
Members of this House expressed strong opiniofis 
that the time must come, at no distant period, 
when an entire change ought to be made, and that 
the introduction of Government liominees into the 
Bast India Direction was only the first step to 
further and ulterior measures ; and the only 
doubt was, whether a full measure ought not at 
that time to be adopted. But, whatever may 
have been the opinion of Parliament at that time, 
I am much mistaken as to the signs and indications 
of opinion in the country now if the nation at 
large has not made up its mind that this ‘ double 
Government ’ ought to cease. I am convinced 
that this is the opinion of the country ; and great 
disappointment would be felt if this House should 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1868 337 

negative the Bill upon an objection to the principle 
itself on which it is founded. We shall, no doubt, 
be met by a motion for delay, and be told that this 
is not the time for discussing the measure ; that 
India is unsettled ; that we should wait until a 
better moment, a calmer period, and until the 
difficulties in India are over. Why, that plea for 
delay is invariably the plea set up by those who are 
anxious to oppose that which they cannot resist 
directly, but which they wish to get rid of by the 
intermediate policy of proposing delay. Why, sir, 
what is the force of any argument of that kind ? 
They say, ‘ Do not alter the machine of Govern- 
ment at a time when India is unsettled, and in 
difficulty, when you have not fully and fyjjally got rid 
of the mutiny, and when you have not entirely re- 
established authority in every part of the country.’ 
What does that argument amount to when it is 
analysed ? It is said ‘ Do not change your Govern- 
ment now, because there is in India that to be done 
which is difficult to be accomplished, and which, 
therefore, it might require great power to accom- 
plish.’ Will, then, any man pretend that a single 
Government at home will not be a much more 
effectual instrument for the purpose than a double 
Government ? Will any man pretend to tell me, 
that with a view to rapidity of discussion and 
execution, unity of purpose, and responsibility to 
the public, a Government administered by the 
responsible advisers of the Crown would not be a 
far more efficient instrument for everything to be 
done here than the existing conflict of checks and 
counter-checks, the system of previous communica- 
tions and subsequent communications, of objeOtfens 
to a dispatch and its transfer by cabs from one 



338 VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 

part of the town to another, by which delay 
was created, so that a dispatch, which ought 
to go out to-morrow, might not go out for a month, 
or be ready until it was too late to send it out. 
Why, no reasonable man will venture to get up 
and tell the House that the present machine can 
be so effective and so powerful a machine for 
administration at home as the machine we propose 
to substitute for it. Will any man acquainted 
with India tell me that the name of the Company 
— which is now pretty well seen through by all the 
natives in India — can have half, or the tenth part 
of the powerful influence the name of the Crown 
would carry with it ? I declare it is nonsense to 
say that tli^ Indian chiefs would not feel ten times 
more respect for the Rajah of England than for 
the name of any unknown Company. Well, then, 
I say, if we look to England, the machine we propose 
to substitute is a much more powerful machine, 
and if we look to India it is a machine infinitely 
more influential than the existing one. Then we 
are told that there is a state of difficulty in India, 
and what is the proposal of those who want delay ? 
They say, that in order to overcome this difficulty, 
and to restore tranquillity in India, which we are 
told is a matter of great difficulty, and which will 
require great strength and power to effect, we 
should prolong the existence of' the present weak 
instrument, instead of substituting for it a stronger, 
more powerful, and more effectual machine. In 
that argument thbre is no sense, I submit. How- 
ever, we shall be told by some that the Government 
of India is a great mystery — ^that the unholy 
ought not to set foot in that temple — ^that the 
House of Commons should be kept aloof from any 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 389 

interference in Indian affairs — that if we transfer 
the Government to the Ministers responsible to 
Parliament, we shall have Indian affairs made the 
subject and plaything of party passions in this 
House, and that great mischief would arise there- 
from. I think that argument is founded on an 
overlooking of the fundamental principles of the 
British constitution. It is a reflection on the 
Parliamentary government. Why, sir, what is 
there in the management of India which is not 
mainly dependent on those general principles of 
statesmanship, which men in public life in this 
country acquire here, and make the guidance of 
their conduct ? I do not think so ill of this House 
as to imagine that it would be disposed, for 
factious purposes, or for the momentary triumph 
of party, to trifle with the great interests of the 
country as connected with the administration of 
our Indian affairs. I am accustomed to think that 
the Parliament of this country does comprise in 
itself as much administrative ability, and as much 
statesmanlike knowledge and science, as are 
possessed by any number of men in any other 
country whatever ; and I own, with all respect 
for the Court of Directors, that I cannot bring 
myself to think that the Parliament of England 
is less capable of wisely administering the great 
affairs of state in connexion with India than the 
Court of Directors in Leadenhall Street. I am not 
afraid to trust Parliament with an insight into 
Indian affairs. I believe, on th5 contrary, that if 
things have not gone on so fast in India as they 
might have done — ^if the progress of improvenaent 
has been somewhat slower than might have been 
expected, that effect has arisen from the circum- 



8*D viscount PALMERSTON, 1868 

stance that the public of Englana at large were 
wholly ignorant of Indian affairs, and had turned 
away from them, being daunted by the complica- 
tions they imagined them to be involved in ; and 
because Parliament has never had face to face, in 
this and the other House, men personally and 
entirely responsible for the administration of 
Indian affairs. No doubt a good deal has been done 
in the way of substantial improvement of late years, 
but that which has been done I may venture to say 
has been entirely the result of debates in this and 
the other House of Parliament. And, so far from 
any discussion on India having worked evil in 
India, I believe that the greater part of those 
improvements which the East India Directors 
boast of in that publication, which has lately 
issued from Leadenhall Street, has been the result 
of pressure on the Indian administration by debates 
in Parliament and discussions in the public press. 
Therefore, so far from being alarmed at the 
consequences which may arrive from bringing 
Indian affairs under the cognizance of Parliament, 
I believe that a great benefit to India, and through 
India to the British nation, \^11 result therefrom. 
Therefore, I say, I see no reason, either on the 
score of principle or on the score of the augmenta- 
tion of patronage, or on the score of time, or 
constitutional danger, why we should not at once 
pass the measure which it will be my duty to 
present to the House. Sir, I trust that Parliament 
will feel that great power is not given to nations 
without corresponding duties to be performed. 
We have, by an almost miraculous train of events, 
been entrusted with the care of the destinies of 150 
or 160 millions of men — with the government. 



VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1858 341 

directly or indirectly, of a vast empire larger in 
extent than the whole face of Europe, putting the 
Russian empire out of the question. That is a 
task which involves great responsibility. Do not 
imagine that it is the intention of Providence that 
England should possess that vast empire, and that 
we should have in our hand the destinies of that 
vast multitude of men, simply that we may send 
out to India the sons of gentlemen or of the middle 
classes to make a decent fortune to live on. That 
power has been entrusted to us for other and 
better purposes ; and, without pointing to any- 
thing particular, I think it is the duty of this 
nation to use it in such a manner as to promote, as 
far as they can, the instruction, the enlightenment, 
and the civilization of those great populations 
which are now subject to our rule. We have 
lately had our attention called to scenes of barbarity 
in India, which would make any man shudder, but 
are we wholly irresponsible for those scenes ? If, 
during the century for which we have exercised 
power in India, we had used that power to 
enlighten and civilize the people, do you think 
their nature would not, in some measure at least, 
have been changed, and that the atrocious crimes 
which they have committed would not have been 
as repugnant to their feelings as they are to those 
of the people of tnis country ? We ought to bear 
these things in mind — to remember that we have a 
great duty to fulfil in India, and I am sure that 
that duty will be best discharged if we commit 
its performance to the hands of men who will 
be accountable to Parliament for their conduct, 
and who feel themselves bound to acquaint th,e 
public of this country, step by step, with the 



m VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, 1868 

arrangements which they make. I am confident, if 
Parliament should adopt the measure we are about 
to propose, that, while on the one hand it will add 
to the strength of our position in India, while it 
will increase the power of this country, and render 
our influence more firm and secure, it will, on the 
other hand, enable us more efficiently to perform 
those important duties which, in my view, it was 
intended that we should discharge when the great 
Indian empire was transferred to our control. 
Sir, I beg to move for leave to bring in a Bill for the 
better Government of India. 

26 . Sir George Cornewall Lewis, House of 
Commons, 12 February 1858 

I NOW come to the other point in the petition of 
the Company ; namely, their claiming credit for 
having exercised their government in India in a 
manner to command universal admiration, and to 
render it a model for all Governments on the face 
of the earth. This is the manner in which the 
Company speak of themselves in the petition 
presented to this House : 

‘ They feel complete assurance that, the more attention 
is bestowed and the more light thrown upon India and its 
administration, the more evident it will become that the 
Government in which they have borne a part has been not 
only one of the purest in intention, fmt one of the most 
beneficent in act ever known among mankind.’ 

It must be acknowledged that the character which 
the Company bei^tow on themselves is not very 
remarkable for the moderation of its terms. Let 
us inquire how far this character rests on the evi- 
dence of facts. The Company may be said to have 
originated with respect to its power at the time of 
the union of the two Companies, which were con- 



SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1858 343 

Bolidated in the reign of William III, and remaiiled 
substantially a trading Company until the battle 
of Plassey was fought by Clive, who shortly after 
laid the foundations of the territorial sovereignty 
of Bengal, by the acquisition of the duannee. A 
few years after the Government of England began 
to make a claim on the Company for a share of their 
territorial acquisitions, and the Company came to 
compromise with the Government, by which they 
were to pay an annual sum of money, instead of, 
as proposed by Lord Clive to Lord Chatham, the 
Crown taking possession of the territorial acquisi- 
tions. This state of things continued for a few 
years, until the abuses prevailing in the adminis- 
tration of the Company attracted thfi attention 
of the legislature ; and in 1773, under tne Ministry 
of Lord North, was passed what was called the 
Regulating Act, by which Parliament first inter- 
fered with the local government of India. By this 
measure it was attempted to place a control, not 
on the Company in London, but on the local govern- 
ment in India. The members of the local council 
in India were named in the Act of 1773. Five 
members were named, and three went out from 
England to conduct the local government, two 
being at the time in India, one of whom was Warren 
Hastings. The repilt of that attempt at Parlia- 
mentary control was dissensions without end in 
the Council, duels between two of the members, 
and a conflict with the Supreme Court ; and the 
experiment ended with a conviction on the part 
of Parliament that the endeavour to subject the 
local government to direct Parliamentary control 
was a complete failure. I should observe, that by 
the Act of 1773 power was taken for the Secretary 



M4 8IK GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1858 

State and the Board of Treasury to examine all 
the correspondence received in England from India. 
Even at that time the principle of Parliamentary 
control over the proceedings of the Company was 
established, and it is material for the House to 
observe the fact, inasmuch as an assumption is 
made in popular arguments that Pal:liament for 
the first time interfered to control the administra- 
tion of the Company by the Act of 1784. That is 
a mistake, for by the Regulating Act of 1773 a 
control was taken for the Crown over the nomina- 
tion of the members of the Council whenever any 
vacancies occurred ; and power also was taken for 
the Secretary of State and the Board of Treasury 
to inspect ^11 correspondence received from India, 
In a few years, however, it was fojnnd that those 
}:>owers were not sufficient, and, in 1781, Lord 
North carried a Bill by which he enlarged the 
superintending authority of the Government, and 
enabled them to control the correspondence sent 
from the Board of Directors to the authorities in 
India. This was, in fact, the germ of the system 
which was afterwards promulgated in Mr. Pitt’s 
Act of 1784. Notwithstanding these successive 
interferences of Parliamentary control, it was 
found that the administration of India did not 
improve — complaints multiplied ; and committees 
of the House were appointed in 1782 and 1783, who 
made a long succession of reports, which any 
gentleman who may be curious to read old docu- 
ments of that description will find included in four 
very large folio volumes, compared with which our 
modern blue books are quite puny and degenerate. 
The whole subject of the Indian administration 
was at that time investigated by two committees 



SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1868 345 

of this House, one of them presided over by 
Mr. Burke and the other by Mr. Dundas, who 
was afterwards President of the Board of Control. 
Those committees made, I believe, not less than 
seventeen reports. I state that fact for the purpose 
of showing that, at the time to which I refer, the 
whole subject of Indian affairs underwent a most 
careful investigation by this House. Those, there- 
fore, who suppose that the administration of the 
East India Company during the ten years from 
1773 to 1784 was one course of uninterrupted 
prosperity must be singularly uninformed in the 
Parliamentary history of that period. I will take 
the liberty of reading an extract from resolutions 
which were moved in this House in 1784 by 
Mr. Burke, in which he describes the re^lt of these 
Parliamentary inquiries ; and if it were necessary, 
if the truth of what I am now stating should be 
disputed, 1 could produce a multitude of passages 
from the reports and from speeches made at that 
time which would support every one of the sweeping 
condemnations in the passages I am about to read. 
I ask the attention of the House to this summary 
of the investigations then made, inasmuch as I 
think it will show them how far the character which 
the Company give to themselves for their adminis- 
tration is true during the time when the adminis- 
tration was really that of the Company — when the 
pure, simple, unmixed management of the Company 
and their officers existed, with a very imperfect con- 
trol, though with some control evell then, on the part 
of the Executive Government. These are the terms 
of the resolution moved by Mr. Burke in 1784 : ^ 

‘ The result of the Parliamentary inquiries has been that 
the East India Company was found totally corrupted and 



346 SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1858 

totally perverted from the purposes of its institution, whether 
political or commercial ; that the powers of war and peace 
given by the Charter had been abused by kindling hostilities 
in every quarter for the purposes of rapine ; that almost 
all the treaties of peace they have made have only given 
cause to so many breaches of public faith ; that countries 
once the most flourishing are reduced to a state of indigence, 
decay, and depopulation, to the diminution of our strength, 
and to the infinite dishonour of our national character ; 
that the laws of this kingdom are notoriously and almost 
in every instance despised ; that the servants of the 
Company, by the purchase of qualifications to vote in the 
general Court, and, at length, by getting the Company 
itself deeply in their debt, having obtained the entire 
and absolute mastery in the body % which they ought to 
have been ruled and coerced. Thus their malversations in 
office are supported instead of being checked by the 
Company. The whole of the affairs of that body are reduced 
to a most pei!i:^ous situation ; and many millions of innocent 
and deserving men who are under the protection of this 
nation, and who ought to be protected by it, are oppressed 
by a most despotic and rapacious tyranny. The Company 
and their servants have strengthened themselves by this 
confederacy, they have set at defiance the authority and 
admonitions of this House employed to reform them ; and 
when this House had selected certain principal delinquents, 
whom they declared it the duty of the Company to recall, 
the Company held out its legal privileges against all re- 
formation, positively refused to recall them, and supported 
those who had fallen under the just censure of this House 
with new and stronger marks of approbation.’ 

Now, I afl&rm that this language, strong as it 
may sound at this moment to a House not familiar 
with the scones of rapine, of extortion, and of every 
species of abomination which had been brought out 
in evidence before the committees of 1782 and 1783, 
is a perfectly faitfiful representation of the opinions 
which prevailed in Parliament at that time with 
respect to the government of the East India Com- 
pany. I most confidently maintain that this notion 
which has got abroad — ^this sentiment — of the 



SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1858 347 

great debt of gratitude which we owe to the East 
India Company is one that was not only entirely 
unknown, but most alien to the feelings of the 
generation who knew what the Company was 
before Parliament had interfered to control it. I 
do most confidently maintain that no civilized 
Government ever existed on the face of this earth 
which was more corrupt, more perfidious, and 
more rapacious than the Government of the East 
India Company from the years 1765 to 1784. That 
was the interval between the period when it first 
acquired territorial sovereignty and the time when 
it was placed under Parliamentary control. During 
that interval the Company exercised the functions 
of trader and governor in combination- with most 
imperfect control on the part of the Government 
and Parliament of this country ; and I appeal 
most confidently to the records of Parliament, to 
the evidence in the reports and documents of this 
House, for conclusive proof damnatory of the 
character of the East India Company as a political 
body. With these documents before me, I confess 
that I cannot read without astonishment the 
character which the Company have bestowed upon 
themselves, founded, as that character is, entirely 
upon their acts since the time when they were 
subjected to Parliamentary supervision — since the 
time when there has been a Board of Control to 
superintend the proceedings of the Directors in 
London — since the Governor - General and the 
other Governors of India have been appointed, 
not by the Directors themselves, but by the Crown 
and Executive Government of this country, subject 
to public opinion and to Parliamentary responsi- 
bilitv. Now, all that can be said in favour of the 



348 SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1858 

Company dates from the year 1784. I challenge 
them to find one bright page in their annals during 
the whole period when they were not subject to 
Parliamentary control. It is by confounding the 
acts of two periods — ^by suppressing their conduct 
in bygone days, which have passed from the 
memory of the present generation, and the records 
of which are to be found chiefly in histories written 
by servants of the Company, and therefore not 
weighing with very great force on their misdoings 
— and by concentrating our vision upon subsequent 
times, when they had become a mere subordinate 
body acting under the control of the Executive 
Government, — ^that they are enabled to claim for 
themselves^his extraordinary credit. 

Now, let us briefly follow the history of the 
Company from the year 1784. We know that 
before that time Mr. Fox and Mr. Burke — the 
latter of whom had been the chairman of one of 
the committees to which I have referred — who was 
deeply impressed with the enormities of the Com- 
pany’s Government, and who, in the subsequent 
impeachment of Warren Hastings brought under 
the attention of the House of Lords^ in speeches 
destined to be coeval with the English language, 
the misdeeds of the Governor whose acts he im- 
pugned — we know that Mr. Fox and Mr. Burke 
combined to frame the clauses* of the first India 
Bill, which nearly annihilated the rule of the 
Company. There was not at that time any feeling 
of sympathy witfi the Company on the part of the 
people of this country ; but the defeat of the 
measure was attributable to alarm respecting 
the Indian patronage, and to the belief that, as the 
Commissioners for India were named in the Bill, 



SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1858 349 

and were the partisans of the Executive Govern- 
ment, an unconstitutional power would be conferred 
upon them. Notwithstanding this prejudice, the 
Bill passed the House of Commons, but it was 
thrown out by the House of Lords, in consequence, 
as was believed, of the personal influence of the 
King, who took alarm at the independent authority 
which he thought would be conferred by the 
measure upon his Minister. The Bill was not 
defeated from any sympathy on the part of the 
country with the Company ; but Mr. Pitt, with 
great dexterity, took advantage of the alarm which 
that measure excited, from the notion that Mr. Fox 
intended to avail himself improperly of the power 
which the Bill would have conferre(J^ upon the 
Government, and the Ministry were defeated. The 
Government fell ; Mr. Pitt succeeded them, and 
he introduced that system of a mixed government 
which has lasted in a certain form down to the 
present day. Any gentleman who will take the 
trouble to read the speech in which Mr. Pitt intro- 
duced his measure will see that he laid it down as 
a principle that there was an overwhelming and 
imperative necessity for legislating upon the subject 
of India — that the public opinion of that time 
absolutely required that the East India Company 
should not be left to continue in the exercise of its 
uncontrolled powers. Mr. Pitt, having thrown out 
the Government of Mr. Fox upon the previous Bill, 
left the East India Company in ^possession of its 
powers, both as respects the government and the 
trade, but he created a Board of Control which waa 
to predominate in all respects over the acts of the 
Directors. Now the House will observe that the 
effect of the institution of that Board of Control 



350 SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1858 

was wholly to alter the character of the East India 
Company. Up to this time the East India Company, 
with the exception of those rudiments of Parlia- 
mentary interference which I have described, was 
a trading Company, exercising sovereign powers 
over certain provinces in India. The institution of 
the Board of Control placed the East India Com- 
pany at once, with respect to its governing powers, 
in a purely subordinate position. They were from 
that time bound to obey every order which the 
Board of Control chose to issue. They retained, no 
dbubt, the initiative, and practically they continued 
to exercise great influence over the affairs of India, 
but legally and constitutionally they were reduced 
to perfect subordination, and they were placed 
completely under the control of this department of 
the Government. In 1793, Mr. Dundas, who was 
then President of the Board of Control, brought in a 
Bill of great length, in which he consolidated all the 
existing enactments on the subject of the Com- 
pany, giving them greater definiteness and greater 
precision ; and he brought to complete perfection 
the system of the double government originated 
in 1784. He renewed the Company’s charter for 
twenty years ; and in that condition it remained 
until the year 1813. In 1813 the opinions on the 
subject of free trade had spread more widely in the 
country, the impatience of the trading community 
at the double monopoly exercised by the East 
India Company made itself felt, and the Govern- 
ment of the day (fetermined to propose the abolition 
of its monopoly of the trade with India, preserving, 
however, its monopoly of the China trade. That 
mighty change, so far as the East India Company 
were concerned, was introduced in 1813. They 



SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1858 351 

were not prohibited from trading with India ; but 
their monopoly was gone. That, in fact, was the 
first great stone struck out of the edifice of the 
East India Company. They had originally been 
merely a trading Company ; their sovereign powers 
had come incidentally ; they acquired incident- 
ally great territorial revenues ; but their main 
and paramount character was that of traders. 
If the House of Commons of that day had acted 
under the influence of feelings which we are told 
now we ought to respect, — if it had been the belief 
of the Parliament of that time that a boundless 
debt of gratitude was owing to the East India 
Company for their acquisitions of territory in 
India — can any one doubt that their trading mono- 
poly would have been retained as one of the most 
precious flowers of their prerogative ? Parliament, 
however, was bold enough to lay its profane hands 
on the ark of the East India Company, and they 
were deprived of the monopoly of the Indian trade. 
Deprived of the monopoly of the Indian trade, the 
Company was distanced by private traders, and 
1 believe they exercised but little of their trading 
privileges after the time they lost their monopoly. 
But they retained the monopoly of the China trade 
for another twenty years. At last came the year 
1833. In that year Mr. Charles Grant, now Lord 
Glenelg, was President of the Board of Control. 
In proposing the Bill of that year to the House of 
Commons he stated that the Government had two 
matters for consideration : one* was whether the 
Company should retain their governing powers ; 
the other, whether they should retain their trading 
powers. Some thought they should be deprived 
of both. The Government came to the conclusion 



m SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1858 

that the whole of their trading powers should be 
abolished by law, that they should cease altogether 
to be a tracing Company, and that not only ^ould 
their monopoly of the China trade be abolished, but 
that they snould be prohibited by law from trading 
either with India or with China ; but he stated, 
however, that the Government did not propose to 
interfere with the governing powers of the Com- 
pany, subject, of course, to the control of the 
Executive Government. 

Observe the changes which the East India Com- 
pany had then undergone under the legislation of 
Parliament. Having originally been only a trading 
Company — having acquired incidentally governing 
powers, their governing powers were first placed 
under the control of a Board of the Executive 
Government, so that they became only subordinate 
governors ; but they retained their original capa- 
city for trade. In 1833 they were prohibited by 
law from trading, so that by that time they had 
lost altogether their original functions as traders, 
and they retained only a portion of governing 
power in a subordinate capacity. That was the 
change which under the legislation of Parliament 
the character and power of the East India Company 
underwent. Be it remarked that it was a constant 
diminution of authority and power, and a perpetual 
invasion of their functions, under the authority of 
Parliament. Again in 1833, the sentimental view 
of the question was altogether overlooked — nothing 
was heard of the Aebt of gratitude due to the East 
India Company, but in consequence of more en- 
lightened views on the subject of freedom of trade 
which then prevailed, as well as of representations 
of the mercantile classes, the whole trade of China 



SIB GEOBGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 185« 353 

and India was thrown open. The Company then 
obtained another lease of twenty years, expiring m 
1863. During that time they were the mere ghost, 
as it were, of the former Company, which was once 
sovereign, which once enjoyed the monopoly of 
great branches of trade ; they became a mere 
governing body of Directors, all their trading power 
was gone, and the controlling power and the 
appointment of their principal officers were vested 
in the Executive. They continued in that inferior 
position for twenty years under the control of the 
Government in England, the Ministry sending out 
instructions, and all the principal authorities of 
India being appointed, not by the Company as 
originally, but by Government. Th^ came the 
renewal of 1853. There was nothing in the circum- 
stances of that time to call for interference. The 
twenty years had gone on in a manner not to incur 
the censure of the House or of the Government ; 
in a greatly improved spirit, owing, as I must 
maintain, in contradiction to the allegations which 
have been made, to the vigilance of Parliament and 
to the effective control of the India Board. But 
even under those favourable circumstances Parlia- 
ment did not renew the Charter without further 
invasion of the original constitution of the Com- 
pany. By the Acjb of that year one-third of the 
Court of Directors was formed of nominees of the 
Crown, so that only two-thirds remained to be 
elected by the proprietors of India Stock ; and 
there was good reason for this alteration. When 
the East India Company existed as traders to the 
East Indies it was reasonable that persons who 
subscribed their money to the common stock, sand 
advanced their capital to carry on their ventures to 

231 -NT 



m SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1868 

the East, should have a voice in the election of the 
Directors, exactly upon the same principle as 
applies to the direction of any other joint-stock 
company. It is the same principle by which share- 
holders of railway companies elect a board of 
Directors, or shareholders of the Bank of England, 
for example, elect the Directors of the Bank. But 
what was the position of the proprietors of East 
India Stock, with reference to the Government of 
India, after the Company had ceased to be a trading 
Company ? Any person may become an East 
India proprietor by purchase of stock in the open 
market, and there is therefore now no necessary 
connexion between the members of the Court of 
Proprietora and the affairs of India. Originally 
the proprietors were persons who had advanced 
capital for carrying on trade with India ; but at 
present they are only proprietors of so many shares 
of a guaranteed stock, and the purchase of that 
stock gives them no more real connexion with the 
affairs of India than the purchase of so much three 
per cent, stock. The constituency which elect the 
Board of Directors is an accidental body, and has 
no real relation with the interests or Government 
of India. The Board of Directors themselves are 
the mere spectre and phantom of that body which 
used to carry on the whole trade with India and 
China, and the proprietors are reduced to the con- 
dition of mere holders of an ordinary stock. This 
is the state to which successive legislative changes 
have brought that body. The fallacy which 
pervades the petition of the Company is this — It 
speaks of the East India Company as one and 
indivisible — as if from the time of the battle of 
Plassey down to the last renewal of the Charter 



SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, 1868 865 

it had remained unchanged in character, functions, 
and influence. The truth is, that it has undergone 
as important changes during those hundred years 
as the English constitution between the Heptarchy 
and the reign of Queen Victoria. It is therefore 
the most transparent sophism — ^it is offering an 
insult to our understanding — to apply arguments 
founded upon the original and unchanged state of 
the Company to the Company in its modern and 
altered form. 


27 . Robert Vernon Smith, House of Commons, 
16 February 185H 

Mr. VERifON Smith said, that befdfe the hon. 
member rose his noble friend (Viscount Palmerston) 
had requested hinr to postpone the motion of which 
he had given notice, in order that the House might 
proceed with the debate on the Indian Government 
Bill. The hon. gentleman declined to comply with 
this request, on the score that it was necessary to 
acquaint the House with certain information not 
then in its possession that it might be enabled the 
better to make up its mind on that Bill, He 
regretted extremely that the hon. member had 
taken that course, not that he had not been satisfied 
to hear his stater&ent, but that it might as well 
have been introduced into the discussion on the 
India Bill, instead of forming a separate motion, 
and prolonging that discussion. • 

Mr. H. Baillie said, he had given notice of his 
motion long before the noble Lord^s Bill was intro- 
duced. 

Mr. Vernon Smith said : he was aware of that ; 



m ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 

h« did not object to the hon. gentleman’s having 
given that notice, but thought that upon the appeal 
of his noble friend he might have delivered his 
speech, full, as it was, of documentary information, 
in the course of the other debate, particularly as he 
seemed to have used it for the purpose of expressing 
his opinion on a question upon which that debate 
turned. Indeed, he should collect from the hon. 
gentleman’s address that the Ministry would have 
his vote in favour of their Bill, because he had 
found as much fault as possible with the existing 
Government of India. If any hon. gentleman 
thought that to condemn the Board of Control 
and the present system was at the same time to 
condemn fihe Bill of his noble friend they were 
totally mistaken. To find fault with the Board 
of Control 'as well as with the Court of Directors 
was, in fact, to find fault with the present system 
that the Bill had been introduced to amend. 

Ho hoped that the hon. gentleman would not 
think him wanting in respect if he abstained from 
answering — or he should not say answering, inas- 
much as he agreed in much that the hon. gentleman 
had said — ^but if he followed him at much less length 
than he had himself occupied in developing his 
ideas. Many of his views were backed by autho- 
rities to which he was not thep prepared to reply, 
because he had not anticipated that the hon. 
gentleman would go at such great length into the 
subject. The nptice which he gave was that he 
should ^ call the attention of the House to the 
causes of the present outbreak in India and he 
commenced by stating that it was very difficult 
to say what were those causes, because none of 
the men in England who were best qualified to 



ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 357 

give opinions, including the hon, and gallant 
gentleman the member for Reigate (Sir Henry 
Rawlinson) whose advent to that House they had 
on the previous evening hailed with so much 
satisfaction, and the hon. member for Leominster 
(Mr. J. P. Willoughby), could describe them. Where 
the Directors, the ex-officio councillors of the State 
upon this subject, had feared to tread, the hon. 
gentleman has rushed in ; but he himself had 
assigned only one cause for all the evil — the 
annexation of Oude. He had not canvassed any 
of those various supposed causes which were 
suggested last Session by the right hon. member 
for Bucks, and which he (Mr. Vernon Smith) and 
others had then discussed. It was sijjgular, but 
it was notorious, that since that date we had 
not at all advanced towards a solution of this 
question ; and that at the present moment not 
only the Government, who might be accused of 
ignorance and incompetcncy, but the most eminent 
men in India, were unable to say what were the 
causes of mutiny. Even Sir John Lawrence, the 
man whose opinions were most favourably received 
in that House, said that he was still ignorant of 
those causes, and that he could not satisfy himself 
that there was any conspiracy organized before- 
hand sufficient to ^account for the most extra- 
ordinary proceeding which had, perhaps, ever 
happened in history. The hon. gentleman then 
embarked upon an historical disquisition on the 
general Indian policy of late years, and he fixed 
upon the. year 1833— probably because then the 
Ministers of the Crown became more responsible 
for the Government of India — as the date at which 
a new policy, what he called a policy of annexation. 



358 ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 

was commenced. He found fault with the policy 
which had been pursued under the administrations 
of Lord William Bentinck, of Lord Auckland, of 
Lord Ellenborough, and of Lord Dalhousie ; in 
fact, with all the noblemen who had administered 
the affairs of India between 1833 and the present 
year, and through them with the Governments 
of all parties who had been in office during that 
time. Now, no one, he imagined, would accuse 
either Lord William Bentinck or Lord Auckland 
of having pursued a policy of annexation, and 
therefore if such a policy had been adopted the 
blame must fall principally upon Lord Ellenborough 
and Lord Dalhousie. But the hon. gentleman was 
entirely mistaken, because he could not perceive 
that any such policy had been adopted or acted 
upon in India. A policy of annexation meant a 
policy of acquisition — a policy in accordance with 
which you should take possession of every territory 
which you could acquire either by conquest or 
cession. Now, although there had, from* time to 
time, been acquisitions of territory in India, he 
did not believe that any Minister or any Governor- 
General had ever, either publicly or privately, laid 
down such a policy. Annexations were of two 
kinds, either to extend the frontier, or to absorb 
the State of a native prince, w|th whom we had a 
subsidiary treaty, and whose territory was in the 
interior of our own possessions. The hon. gentle- 
man had referreji to both species of annexation, 
but he had admitted that one kind was founded 
upon very sound policy. No one could doubt that, 
during the recent outbreak, we derived great ad- 
vantage from having annexed the Punjab. Not 
only did the possession of that province prevent 



ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 359 

our being attacked from that quarter, but the 
existence of large forces in the Punjab enabled us 
to strike at the mutineers much earlier, and more 
effectually, than we could otherwise have done. It 
was to those troops mainly that we owed the rapid 
suppression of the mutiny. The policy of annexa- 
tion, as it was called, was a very doubtful one, and 
the only fair way was to judge of each acquisition 
of territory according to its own justification, and 
its own value. To a general policy of annexation, 
not merely he (Mr. Vernon Smith), but every man 
of sense, must be opposed, nor was it part of the 
spirit of any Court of Directors or of the Home 
Government ; yet in spite of all the declarations, 
both oral and written, made by the Court of 
Directors and by different Ministers, aftnost every 
Governor-General had added something to our 
j^ossessions. A man who went out to India in that 
y)osition must go out with a desire for fame, and 
unfortunately, in India, fame was only to be 
obtained by the acquisition of territory. That 
was the great temptation to which Governors- 
General were exposed, and it was against that, 
therefore, that the Government at home ought 
mainly to exert themselves ; but he thought that 
the hon. gentleman had failed to show that the 
Government at home had not discharged that duty. 
The hon. gentlemaA had endeavoured to distinguish 
between the Crown and the Court of Directors ; 
but he contended that, in all cases of annexations, 
if there was any crime, the Cro'^n and the Court 
of Directors had been equally culpable. In almost 
every case which he had mentioned they had gone 
hand in hand. The first mover was the Govei^fior^ 
General, but the backers and supporters ofc his; 



360 ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 

policy had always been the Court of Directors and 
the Crown. The hon. gentleman was not accurate 
when he stated that, with all these annexations, 
there had been no addition to the number of 
European troops in India. Although the increase 
had not been large, it was a fact that, since 1833, 
the number of Queen’s troops had risen from 20,000 
to 24,000, while there had also been an addition 
of three European regiments, one in each Presi- 
dency, to the army of the Company. The hon. 
gentleman might say that the increase was but 
small ; but it had been made ; and the reason why 
the increase had been so small, was, that up to the 
10th May, 1857, we had always depended upon 
native troops. Our policy had been to make the 
natives so subservient there that they should form 
regiments of police to retain the countries which 
we had annexed ; and it had been the admiration 
of all mankind that the Government of India had 
been able to do that which all other nations had 
failed in doing — not only to conquer the nations, 
but to compel the inhabitants themselves of the 
conquered countries to maintain our conquests. 
Proceeding with his history, the hon. gentleman 
said that the mutiny broke out because the natives 
saw that a favourable moment had arrived. He 
much questioned the accuracy of that expression, 
because he thought that the period of the Crimean 
war would have been a much more favourable 
opportunity than that which was selected for the 
commencement of this outbreak. The hon. gentle- 
man complained that, at the same time that they 
were annexing Oude, the Government embarked 
in the Persian war. That was a matter of fact ; 
but there was no apprehension of any outbreak in 



ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 361 

Oude, and the Persian war had thrown no obstacle 
in the way of putting down the mutiny, because 
the troops which had returned from that expedi- 
tion were the first which applied themselves to 
its suppression. That war he had, on a proper 
occasion, been prepared to defend, not only as 
having been justifiable and politic, but also as 
having greatly added to our prestige in India. He 
was sorry to hear the hon. gentleman say that the 
annexation of Oude was effected in a manner most 
discreditable to Lord Dalhousie, because neither in 
that House nor elsewhere had that noble lord been 
well treated by those who now objected to his 
policy. For nearly two years the annexation of 
Oude had been before the country, ai^ had even 
been discussed in that House ; yet it was now 
whispered that the Directors had nothing to do 
with it. That was totally and entirely incorrect. 
Lord Dalhousie, as the hon. gentleman had said 
with something of a sneer, received a pension, but 
that pension had not even been objected to in the 
House of Commons, except that an hon. gentleman 
had asked if the Court of Directors had power to 

g ant it. The Court of Directors had thanked Lord 
alhousie, and as one of their reasons for thanks 
they mentioned the acquisition of Oude. The 
annexation of ths^ country was effected by Lord 
Dalhousie with great ability. Such was the con- 
fidence of the Directors and of himself in the noble 
lord, that they left to him, as to^the manner of the 
annexation, a latitude of discretion suiji as had 
hardly ever been left to a Governor-General ; and 
they thought then, and still thought, that he had 
conducted that operation in the best, in the most 
manly, and in the most creditable manner possible. 



362 ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 

The hon. gentleman said the notion of annexing 
Oude was not first entertained by Lord Dalhousie. 
That was true, for the idea of annexing Oude had 
existed since 1799. It was held by Lord Wellesley, 
and every succeeding Governor-General of India 
down to the time of Lord Dalhousie, not because 
it was one of the richest territories of India, but 
because it was in close neighbourhood to our own 
dominions, and one of the worst governed countries 
on the face of the earth. There were dispatches 
in the blue books detailing the horrors of the 
government of Oude, and, indeed, the materials on 
this point were so numerous that he could occupy 
the time of the House for hours without exhausting 
the subject^. If the hon. gentleman wanted more 
information on this subject he would recommend 
him to read the revelations made by Colonel 
Sleeman, and see in the work called The Private 
Life of an Eastern King a true description of the 
condition of afiairs under the King of Oude. The 
hon. gentleman asked if we could point out any 
difference between the state of Oude in 1801 and 
1856. His reply was, it was those very fifty years 
during which matters had become so much worse 
in Oude, that at length the period arrived when it 
bedame absolutely necessary to put an end to a 
state of things that could no Iqnger be tolerated. 
Lord Dalhousie, very naturally, having exercised 
a splendid reign in India, wished to close it by 
accomplishing an ^ct which everybody had desired 
to accomplish, but which no one had ventured to 
grapple' with but himself. The hon. gentleman 
contended that by the treaty of 1801 we were not 
entitled to deal in this way with the government 
of Oude. But Lord Dalhousie had shown in his 



ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 363 

minute that by the third article the Nawab Vizier 
engaged that he 

‘ Will . establish, in his reserved dominions, such a 
system of administration, to be carried into effect by his 
own officers, as shall be conducive to the prosperity of his 
subjects and be calculated to secure the lives and property 
of the inhabitants ; and his Excellency will always advise 
with and act in conformity to the counsel of the officers of 
the East India Company.’ 

The article was never complied with, and therefore 
had we not fair ground for saying that the treaty 
was broken on the part of the government of 
Oude ? The hon. gentleman further said we had 
dealt unfairly with the King of Oude, and that he 
had no reason to expect he would receive such 
treatment from an ally like that of the^overnment 
of India. Lord Dalhousie, it was true, bore 
testimony to the merit of the King of Oude as an 
ally ; but how could he be otherwise than a faithful 
ally when we were supporting him upon his throne 
and supplying him with our soldiers ? He was 
but too happy to gain these objects by rendering 
us in return some assistance ; but all along his 
conduct was so bad that he was continually 
receiving warnings. He was warned in 1831 by 
Lord William Bentinck, who told him that : 

‘ If the warning he then gave was disregarded it was 
his (the Govemor-GAierars) intention to submit to the 
home authorities his advice that the British Govern- 
ment should assume the direct management of the Oude 
dominions.’ 

And His Majesty was informed that the Court of Di* 
rectors had subsequently granted to the Governor- 
General the authority which he had asked for that 
purpose. He was again warned in 1847 by Lord 
Hardinge, who impressed upon the King * the great 



364 ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 

importance of making salutary and decisive changes 
in his administration and remarked : 

‘ By wisely taking timely measures for the reformation 
of abuses as one of the first acts of your reign, you will, 
with honour to your own character, rescue your people 
from their miserable condition ; but if your Majesty 
procrastinates you incur the risk of forcing the British 
Government to interpose in the government of Oude.’ 

Lord Hardinge gave him two years to accomplish 
that object ; but still nothing was done. Lord 
Dalhousie gave him seven more ; nothing was 
done. Surely after that it was time to interfere. 
The oppression of his people of which he was guilty 
was the sole cause and a sufficient justification of 
that interference. The oppression he promised 
time after tiiae to remedy and bring to an end ; but 
instead of doing so, his tyranny rose to such a pitch 
that it was no longer tolerable. Let the House 
reflect how that oppression was maintained. It 
was by British bayonets. It was by maintaining 
troops for his use that the King of Oude was enabled 
to tyrannize over his unfortunate people ; and 
when the question which Lord Dalhousie had to 
decide was, whether he would withdraw those 
troops and expose the country to anarchy and 
confusion, or take possession of the province, he 
thought he took the most manly course in deciding 
upon the latter alternative. Ifranarchy and con- 
fusion had prevailed in our immediate neighbour- 
hood, it would have been evident to everybody that, 
it was with our knowledge and cognizance, and 
every civilized State would have cried out upon 
us as the authors of the evil — every native State 
in India would have sneered at our pretensions to 
superior morality when they saw us conniving at 
a state of anarchy and disorder in the province of 



365 


ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 

Oude. Lord Dalhousie took the right course, there- 
fore, when he assumed the government of Oude. 
The hon. gentleman pointed to this annexation of 
Oude as the chief, if not the only cause of the 
mutiny. Now, that might be so, and yet the act 
be justifiable in itself. It might possibly have 
led to consequences which were not foreseen at the 
time. Who did foresee what had happened in India ? 
And if we were incapable of foreseeing all the mis- 
chief that ensued, he was perfectly willing that 
the annexation of Oude should be reckoned amongst 
those acts which we did, and did justly at the time, 
in our dream of the fidelity of the native army. 
But when the hon. gentleman pointed to the an- 
nexation of Oude as the cause of the mutiny, he 
(Mr. Vernon Smith) would ('all the attention of the 
House to dates. Oude was not the place where 
the mutiny broke out. It did not appear there 
till at least a month after it had broken out at 
Meerut. But it arose, he said, from the number 
of sepoys from Oude employed in the army. It 
was not easy to arrive at exact conclusions in 
matters of this kind, when it was so often found 
that what they considered logical results failed 
them ; but it must be borne in mind that there 
were sepoys in the Bombay army, and in other 
parts of India, where they showed no disposition 
to rebel. But tlio Oude army subsisted on the 
plunder of the people of Oude, and were no doubt 
sorry to be deprived of it by the annexation ; it was 
the destruction of monopoly, £ftid very naturally 
those who had profited by the monopoly were dis* 
contented. But the advantage was all on the side 
of the people of Oude. There could be no doubt 
that the first account we had from Oude, after the 



366 ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 

annexation, was that everything was proceeding 
tranquilly, and that the entire transfer of the 
provinces to the British dominions had been made, 
as was stated in one dispatch, without a single 
drop of blood being shed or even a single murmur. 
The hon. gentleman said that in 1833 there were 
secret orders given to the Governor-General to 
annex the kingdom of Oude. He spoke so positively 
on the subject, and seemed to have studied it so 
maturely that he (Mr. Vernon Smith) was loth to 
contradict him in making that assertion ; but he 
was able to say that when he made inquiry after 
this secret dispatch he was unable to find it. He 
inquired of Mr. Waterfield, one of the most ex- 
perienced clerks to be found in any office under 
the Crown. ' He was all that time connected with 
the Secret Committee, but remembered nothing 
of such a dispatch. His noble friend (Lord Glenelg) 
had assisted him with his recollections while he 
was making his inquiries. His noble friend was 
President of the Board of Control at the time the 
hon. gentleman had referred to, but neither could 
he recollect any such dispatch. All he would now 
say was that if it could be found it would be 
produced to the House. He begged to observe, 
however, that the scheme of annexing Oude was 
always in contemplation, and that it was one to 
which no objection was made' by the Court of 
Directors. When the hon. gentleman said Her 
Majesty’s Government ordered Lord Dalhousie to 
carry out the annexation of Oude he was mistaken. 
Lord Dalhousie suggested the dealing with this 
question himself. He said : 

‘ In addressing you upon this subject I would venture 
to urge upon you an early consideration and decision of 



ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 367 

the question relating to Oude. From indications of your 
opinion upon this question, which already appear upon 
record, and tfrom the nature of the case which has now been 
laid before you, it seems to me impossible that you can 
ultimately avoid ha ving recourse to the measure which has 
been recommended for your immediate adoption. If 
under these circumstances you should consider that the 
experience of eight years will arm me with greater authority 
for carrying the proposed measure into effect than any 
Governor-General when first entering on the administration 
of this empire is likely to command, I beg permission to 
assure you that I am ready to undertake the duty.’ 

The hon. gentleman, therefore, could hardly 
assume that the Government originated the inten- 
tion of dealing with Oude, though as regarded the 
act he was of course prepaied to say that the 
government was responsible for it as well as the 
Court of Directors. General Low, wbl) had always 
been opposed to annexation and who had been 
quoted by the member for Bucks, in the last 
Session, as the best authority against that policy, 
had put upon record a minute of his approval of 
the annexation of Oude, because of the shameful 
oppression of the people by the Government, the 
general infraction of the treaty by the King, and 
because the relative position of Great Britain to 
that kingdom differed from that in which it stood 
to any other native state. He also thought that 
such a step would prevent future misrule in Oude 
itself. General Outram, too, the Commissioner at 
Lucknow, who had stood up for the Ameers of 
Scinde, subscribed to the policy of annexing Oude, 
and every man at all acquainted with the country, 
whose authority was of any value, likewise approv^ 
of it It was upon the strength of their authority 
Government had acted, and was now prepared to 
take the responsibility. 



368 EGBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 

Again, the hoii. gentleman had told them that 
the C5rown was responsible for most of the wars 
that had taken place. He (Mr. Vernon Smith) 
thought upon that point the hon. gentleman was 
completely mistaken. The only case on which the 
hon. gentleman had dwelt was that of the Afghan 
war. He (Mr. Vernon Smith) would call to his 
recollection a speech on that subject made recently 
at the India House by Mr. Prinsep, which he 
thought finally settled that question. Mr. Prinsep 
was at the time Secretary to the Council at Calcutta, 
and he positively objected in writing to that war, 
and yet he had the candour and fairness to state 
during the discussion the other day at the India 
House that for the Afghan war the Indian Govern- 
ment was as Responsible as Her Majesty’s Ministers. 
He (Mr. Vernon Smith) could only conclude that 
the hon, gentleman, in bringing forward this motion 
for the sake of showing that the Crown was not to 
be trusted with the management of Indian affairs, 
had only shown that the Board of Control was not 
to be so trusted, and that, he (Mr. Vernon Smith) 
contended, was an attack on the existing Govern- 
ment of India. The Board of Control might be as 
much to blame as the Court of Directors. It was 
against the union of those two powers that Her 
Majesty’s Ministers had thought fit to act, and to 
introduce a Bill for the purpose 6f their abolition. 
With regard to the return moved for by the hon. 
gentleman, he did not know of anything in the 
papers called for w^iich he should not be perfectly 
ready to produce ; but he believed the answer to 
the principal subjects indicated in the motion 
would be nil. With respect, for instance, to ‘ copies 
of a secret dispatch signed by the President of the 



ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 369 

Board of Control in 1831, addressed to Lord William, 
Bentinck, and ordering him to annex or otherwise 
assume the administration of the kingdom of Oude’, 
he was told that it would be very difficult to find 
such a dispatch either at the India House or at the 
Board of Control. He might here remark, as a 
proof of the general ignorance that prevailed as to 
the India administration, that even the hon. gentle- 
man (Mr. Baillie) himself, who at one time had the 
honour of a seat at the Board of Control, did not 
seem to be aware that by the forms of office at that 
Board the President did not sign any secret dis- 
patches. He (Mr. Vernon Smith) believed that the 
‘ dispatch (moved for) of Lord William Bentinck, 
ex])laining his reasons for not carrying those orders 
into effect ’, was already before Parliai^ent. Copies 
of ‘ the correspondence which took place, through 
the Secret Department of the India House, between 
the President of the Board of Control and the 
Governor-General of India, in the years 1833, 1834, 
and 1835, in reference to the annexation of Oude \ 
the hon. gentleman could also have if they could 
be produced ; but he had already told the hon. 
gentleman that the letter of which he had spoken 
was to him (Mr. Vernon Smith) a perfect novelty. 
As to ‘ a copy of a note or minute, signed by Sir 
Henry Ellis, when a member of the Board of Con- 
trol, explaining hiS reasons for dissenting from the 
projected annexation of Oude that also might be 
produced, although the hon. gentleman must be 
aware that a minute made by^ member of any 
Board, and not officially made, was rather in the 
nature of a private document. But he (Mr. Vernon 
Smith) was exceedingly anxious that the whole of 
the information which the hon. gentleman thought 



370 ROBERT VERNON SMITH, 1858 

, necessary to elucidate the subject under discussion 
should be placed in his possession, and any of the 
papers indicated in the motion, he should b<^ ready 
to produce if it was in his power to do so. ‘ 

28 . Oovernment of India Act, 1858 {21 (& 22 
Viet. c. 106) 

I. The Government of the territories now in the 
possession or under the Government of the East 
India Company, and all powers in relation to 
Government vested in or exercised by the said 
Company in trust for Her Majesty, shall cease to 
be vested in or exercised by the said Company ; 
and all territories in the possession or under the 
government' of the said Company, and all rights 
vested in or which if this Act had not been passed 
might have been exercised by the said Company 
in relation to any territories, shall become vested 
in Her Majesty, and be exercised in her name ; and 
for the purposes of this Act India shall mean the 
territories vested in Her Majesty as aforesaid, and 
all territories which may become vested in Her 
Majesty by virtue of any such rights as aforesaid. 

II. India shall be governed by and in the name 
of Her Majesty, and all rights in relation to any 
territories which might have been exercised by the 
said Company if this Act had no't been passed shall 
and may be exercised by and in the name of Her 
Majesty as rights incidental to the Government of 
India ; and all the territorial and other revenues 
of or arising in India, and all tributes and other 
payments in respect of any territories which would 
have been receivable by or in the name of the said 
Company if this act had not been passed, shall be 



GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1858 371 

received for and in the name of Her Majesty, and 
shall be applied and disposed of for the purposes of 
the Government of India alone, subject to the 
provisions of this Act. 

III. Save as herein otherwise provided, one of 
Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State shall 
have and perform all such or the like powers and 
duties over all officers appointed or continued 
under this Act, as might or should have been 
exercised or performed by the East India Company, 
or by the Court of Directors or Court of Proprietors 
of the said Company, either alone or by the direc- 
tion or with the sanction or approbation of the 
Commissioners for the afiairs of India in relation 
to such government or revenues, and the officers 
and servants of the said Company lesjfectively, and 
also all such powers as might have been exercised 
by the said Commissioners alone ; and any warrant 
or writing under Her Majesty’s Royal Sign Manual, 
which by the Act of the session holdeii in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth years of Her Majesty, 
chapter seventy-seven, or otherwise, is required to 
be countersigned by the President of the Com- 
missioner for the afiairs of India, shall in lieu of 
being so countersigned be countersigned by one 
of Her Majesty’s principal secretaries of State. 

VI. In case Her Majesty be pleased to appoint 
a fifth Principal Secretary of State, there shall be 
paid out of the revenues of India to such Principal 
Secretary of State and to his Under Secretaries 
respectively the like yearly salrflries as may for the 
time being be paid to any other of such Secretaries 
of State and his Under Secretaries respectively. 

VII. For the purposes of this Act a council shall 
be established, to consist of fifteen members, and 



372 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1858 

to be styled the Council of India ; and henceforth 
the Council in India now bearing that name shall 
be styled the Council of the Governor-General of 
India. 

VIII. Within fourteen days after the passing of 
this Act the Court of Directors of the East India 
Company shall, from among the persons then being 
Directors of the said Company or having been 
theretofore such Directors, elect seven persons to 
be with the persons to be appointed by her Majesty 
as herein-after mentioned the first members of the 
(Council under this Act, and the names of the persons 
so elected by the Court of Directors shall be forth- 
with, after such election, certified to the Board of 
Commissioners for the affairs of India, under the 
seal of the sehd Company, and it shall be lawful for 
Her Majesty, by Warrant under Her Royal Sign 
Manual, within thirty days after the passing of 
this Act, to appoint to be members of such Council 
eight persons : provided always that, if the Court 
of Directors of the East India Company shall refuse 
or shall for such fourteen days neglect to make 
such election of such seven persons, and to certify 
the names of such persons as aforesaid, it shall be 
lawful for Her Majesty, by warrant under Her 
Royal Sign Manual, within thirty days after the 
expiration of such fourteen days, to appoint from 
among the said Directors seven* persons to make 
up the full number of the said Council : provided 
also that, if any person being or having been such 
Director, and elec?ted or appointed as aforesaid, 
shall refuse to accept the office, it shall be lawful 
for Her Majesty, by warrant under Her Royal Sign 
Manual, to appoint in the place of every person so 
refusing some other person to be a member of the 



GOVERNMENT OP INDIA ACT, 1858 373 

Council, but so that nine members of the Council at 
the least shall be persons qualified as herein-after 
mentioned. 

IX. Every vacancy happening from time to 
time among the members of the Council appointed 
by Her Majesty, not being members so appointed 
by reason of the refusal or neglect of the Court of 
Directors or the refusal to accept office hereinbefore 
mentioned, shall be filled up by Her Majesty, by 
warrant under Her Royal Sign Manual, and every 
other vacancy shall be filled up by the Council by 
election made at a meeting to be held for that 
purpose.^ 

X. The major part of the persons to be elected 
by the Court of Directors, and the major part of 
the persons to be first appointed by^Her Majesty 
after the passing of this Act, to be members of the 
Council, shall be persons who shall have served or 
resided in India for ten years at the least, and 
(excepting in the case of late and present Directors 
and officers on the Home establishment of the East 
India Company who shall have so served or resided) 
shall not have last left India more than ten years 
next preceding the date of their appointment : and 
no person other than a person so qualified shall 
be appointed or elected to fill any vacancy in the 
Council unless at the time of the appointment or elec- 
tion nine at the least of the continuing members 
of the Council be persons qualified as aforesaid. 

XI. Every member of the Council appointed or 
elected imder this Act shall h(Ild his office during 
good behaviour : provided that it shall be lawful 

‘ The power of appointment was given to the Secretary 
of State by 32 & 33 Viet. c. 97, and the term reduced to ten 
years. 



374 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1858 

for Her Majesty to remove any such member from 
his office upon an address of both Houses of Par- 
liament. 

XI I. No member of the Council appointed or 
elected under this Act shall be capable of sitting or 
voting in Parliament. 

XIII. There shall be paid to each member of 
the Council the yearly salary of one thousand two 
hundred pounds, out of the revenues of India. 

XIX. The Council shall, under the direction of 
the Secretary of State, and subject to the pro- 
visions of this Act, conduct the business transacted 
in the United Kingdom in relation to the Govern- 
ment of India and the correspondence with India, 
hut every o^der or communication sent to India 
shall be signed by one of the Principal Secretaries 
of State ; and, save as expressly provided by this 
Act, every order in the United Kingdom in relation 
to the Government of India under this Act shall be 
signed by such Secretary of State ; and all dis- 
])atches from Governments and Presidencies in 
India, and other dispatches from India, which if 
this Act had not been passed should have been 
addressed to the Court of Directors or to their 
Secret Committee, shall be addressed to such 
Secretary of State. 

XX. It shall be lawful for the Secretary of State 
to divide the Council into committees for the more 
convenient transaction of business, and from time 
to time to re-arrange such committees, and to 
direct what departfnents of the business in relation 
to the Government of India under this Act shall be 
under such committees respectively, and generally 
to direct the manner in whicli all such business 
shall be transacted. 



GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1868 376 

XXI. Tlie Secretary of State shall be the Presi- 
dent of the Council, with power to vote, and it 
shall be lawful for such Secretary of State in 
Council to appoint from time to time any member 
of such Council to be Vice-President thereof, and 
any such Vice-Prcvsident may at any time be re- 
moved by the Secretary of State. 

XXII. All powers by this Act required to be 
exercised by the Secretary of State in Council, and 
all powers of the Council, shall and may be exercised 
at meetings of such Council, at which not less than 
five members shall be present, and at every meeting 
the Secretary of State, or in his absence the Vice- 
President, if present, shall preside, and in the 
absence of the Secretary of State and Vice-Presi- 
dent, one of the members of the Coflncil present 
shall be chosen by the members present to preside 
at the meeting ; and such Council may act not- 
withstanding any vacancy therein : meetings of 
the Council shall be so convened and held when 
and as the Secretary of State shall from time to 
time direct ; provided that one such meeting at 
least be held in (‘.very week. 

XXIII. At any meeting of the Council at which 
the Secretary of State is present, if there be a 
difference of opinion on any question other than 
the question of the election of a member of Council, 
or other than any question with regard to which a 
majority of the votes at a meeting is hereinafter 
declared to be necessary, the determination of the 
Secretary of State 6hall be final • and in case of an 
equality of votes at any meeting of the Council, the 
Secretary of State, if present, and in his absence 
the Vice-President, or presiding member, shall 
have a casting vote ; and all acts done at any 



876 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1858 

meeting of the Council in the absence of the 
Secretary of State, except the election of a member 
of the Council, shall require the sanction or approval 
in writing of the Secretary of State ; and in case 
of difference of opinion on any question decided at 
any meeting, the Secretary of Stai^e may require 
that his opinion, and the reasons for the same, 
be entered in the minutes of the proceedings, and 
any member of the Council who may have been 
present at the meeting may require that his opinion, 
and any reason for the same that he may have 
stated at the meeting, be entered in like manner. 

XXIV. Every order or communication proposed 
to be sent to India, and every order proposed to be 
made in the United Kingdom, by the Secretary of 
State undeJ this Act, shall, unless the same has 
been submitted to a meeting of the Council, be 
placed in the Council room for tlie perusal of all 
members of the Council during seven days before 
the sending or making thereof, except in the cases 
hereinafter provided ; and it shall be lawful for 
any member of the Council to record in a minute 
book, to be kept for that purpose, his opinipn with 
respect to each such order or communication, and 
a copy of every opinion so recorded shall be sent 
forthwith to the Secretary of State. 

XXV. If a majority of the Council record as 
aforesaid their opinions against* any act proposed 
to be done, the Secretary of State shall, if he do 
not defer to the opinions of the majority, record 
his reasons for actJmg in opposition thereto, 

XXIX. The appointments of Governor-General 
of India, fourth ordinary member of the Council of 
the Governor-General of India, and Governors 
of Presidencies in India, now made by the Court 



GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1858 377 

of Directors with the approbation of Her Majesty, 
and the appointments of Advocate -Oeneral for the 
several Presidencies now made with the approbation 
of the Commissioners for the affairs of India, shall 
be made by Her Majesty by warrant under Her 
Royal Sign Manual ; the appointments of the 
ordinary members of the •Council of the Governor- 
General of India, except the fourth ordinary mem- 
ber, and the appointments of the Members 
of Council of the several Presidencies, shall be 
made by the Secretary of State in Council, with 
the concurrence of a majority of members present 
at a meeting ^ ; the appointments of the Lieutenant- 
Governors of provinces or territories shall be made 
by the Governor-General of India, subject to the 
approbation of Her Majesty ; and all fitch appoint- 
ments shall be subject to the qualifications now by 
law affecting such offices respectively. 

XXX. All appointments to offices, commands, 
and employments in India, and all promotions, 
which by law or under any regulations, usage, or 
custom, are now made by any authority in India, 
shall continue to be made in India by the like 
authority, and subject to the qualifications, con- 
ditions, and restrictions now affecting such appoint- 
ments respectively ; but the Secretary of State in 
Council, with the concurrence of a majority of 
members present at a meeting, shall have the like 
power to make regulations for the division and 
distribution of patronage and power of nomination 
among the several authorities In India, and the 
like power of restoring to their stations, offices, or 
employments, officers and servants suspended or 

‘ This power was transferred to the Crown by 32 & 33 
Viet. c. 97. 



37t GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1858 

removed by any authority in India as might have 
been eiercised by the said Court of Directors, with 
the approbation of the Commissioners for the 
affairs of India, if this Act had not been passed. 

XL. The Secretary of State in Council, with the 
concurrence of a majority of votes at a meeting, 
shall have full power to sell and dispose of all real 
and personal estate whatsoever for the time being 
vested in Her Majesty under this Act, as may be 
thought fit, or to raise money on any such real 
estate by way of mortgage, and make the proper 
assurances for that purpose, and to purchase and 
acquire any land or hereditaments, or any interests 
therein, stores, goods, chattels, and other property, 
and to enter into any contracts whatsoever, as may 
be thought ffo, for the purposes of this Act ; and 
all property so acquired shall vest in Her Majesty 
for the service of the Government of India ; and 
any conveyance or assurance of or concerning any 
real estate to be made by the authority of the 
Secretary of State in Council may be made under 
the hands and seals of three members of the 
Council. 

XLI. The expenditure of the revenues of India, 
both in India and elsewhere, shall be subject to 
the control of the Secretary of State in Council, 
and no grant or appropriation of any part of such 
revenues, or of any other property coming into 
the possession of the Secretary of State in Council 
by virtue of this Act, shall be made without the 
concurrence of a ntajority of votes at a meeting of 
the Council. 

LIII. The Secretary of State in Council shall, 
within the first fourteen days during which Parlia- 
ment may be sitting next after the first day of May 



GOVERNMENT OP INDIA ACT, 1858 379 

in every year, lay before both Houses of Parliament 
an account for the financial year preceding that 
last completed of the annual produce of the 
revenues of India, distinguishing the same under 
the respective heads thereof, at each of the several 
Presidencies or Governments, and of all the annual 
receipts and disbursements at home and abroad 
on account of the Government of India, distinguish- 
ing the same under the respective heads thereof, 
together with the latest estimate of the same for 
the last financial year, and also the amount of the 
debts chargeable on the revenues of India, with 
the rates of interest they respectively carry, and 
the annual amount of such interest, the state of 
the effects and credits at each Presidency or 
Government, and in England or elsewhere, applic- 
able to the purposes of the government of India, 
according to the latest advices which have been 
received thereof, and also a list of the establish- 
ment of the Secretary of State in Council, and the 
salaries and allowances payable in respect thereof, 
and if any new or increased salaries or pensions of 
fifty pounds a year or upwards have been granted 
or created within any year, the particulars thereof 
shall be specially stated and explained at the foot 
of the account of such year ; and such account 
shall be accompanied by a statement prepared 
from detailed reports from each Presidency and 
district in India in such form as shall best exhibit 
the moral and material progress and condition of 
India in each such Presidency* 

LIV. When any order is sent to India directing 
the actual commencement of hostilities by Her 
Majesty’s forces in India, the fact of such order 
having been sent shall be communicated to both 



380 GOVERNMENT OP INDIA ACT, 1858 

Houses of Parliament within three months after 
the sending of such order, if Parliament be sitting, 
unless such order shall have been in the meantime 
revoked or suspended, and if Parliament be not 
sitting at the end of such three months, then within 
one month after the next meeting of Parliament. 

LV. Except for preventing or repelling actual 
invasion of Her Majesty’s Indian possessions, or 
under other sudden and urgent necessity, the 
revenues of India shall not, without the consent 
of both Houses of Parliament, be applicable to 
defray the expenses of any military operation 
carried on beyond the external frontiers of such 
possessions by Her Majesty’s forces charged upon 
such revenues. 

LVI. The Inilitary and naval forces of the East 
India Company shall be deemed to be the Indian 
military and naval forces of Her Majesty, and shall 
be under the same obligations to serve Her Majesty 
as they would have been under to serve the said 
Company, and shall be- liable to serve within the 
same territorial limits only, for the same terms 
only, and be entitled to the like pay, pensions, 
allowances, and privileges, and the like advantages 
as regards promotion and otherwise, as if they had 
continued in the service of the said Company ; 
such forces, and all persons hereafter enlisting in 
or entering the same, shall continue and be subject 
to all Acts of Parliament, laws of the Governor- 
General of India in Council, and articles of war, 
and all other lawh, regulations, and provisions 
relating to the East India Company's military and 
naval forces respectively, as if Her Majesty’s 
Indian military and naval forces respectively had 
throughout such acts, laws, articles, regulations, 



GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1858 381 

and provisions been mentioned or referred to, 
instead of such forces of the said Company ; and 
the pay and expenses of and incident to Her 
Majesty’s Indian military and naval forces shall 
be defrayed out of the revenues of India. 

LVII. Provided that it shall be lawful for Her 
Majesty from time to time by order in Council 
to alter or regulate the terms and conditions of 
service under which persons hereafter entering 
Her Majesty’s Indian forces shall be commissioned, 
enlisted, or entered to serve, and the forms of 
attestation and of the oath or declaration to be 
used and taken or made respectively on attesting 
persons to serve in Her Majesty’s Indian forces 
shall be such as Her Majesty with jegard to the 
European forces, and the Governor-General of 
India in Council with regard to the native forces, 
shall from time to time direct : provided, that 
every such order in Council shall be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament within fourteen days 
after the making thereof, if Parliament be sitting, 
and, if Parliament be not sitting, then within 
fourteen days after the next meeting thereof. 

LXV. The Secretary of State in Council shall 
and may sue and be sued as well in India as in 
England by the name of the Secretary of State in 
“Council as a body corporate ; and all persons and 
bodies politic shall and may have and take the 
same suits, remedies, and proceedings, legal and 
equitable, against the Secretary of State in Council 
of India as they could have done against the said 
Company; and the property and effects hereby 
vested in Her Majesty for the purposes of the 
Government of India, or acquired for the said 
purposes, shall be subject and liable to the same 



382 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1858 

judgements and executions as they would while 
vested in the said Company have been liable to 
in respect of debts and liabilities lawfully contracted 
and incurred by the said Company. 

LX VI I . All treaties made by the said Company 
shall be binding on Her Majesty, and all contracts, 
covenants, liabilities, and engagements of the said 
Company made, incurred, or entered into before 
the commencement of this Act may be enforced 
by and against the Secretary of State in Council 
in like manner and in the same Courts as they 
might have been by and against the said Company 
if this Act had not been passed. 


29 . Procla'Uation by the Queen to the Princes, 
Chiefs, and the People of India, 1 November, 
1858 

Victoria, by the Grace of God of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and of the 
Colonies and Dependencies thereof in Europe, Asia, 
Africa, America, and Australasia, Queen, Defender 
of the Faith. 

Whereas, for divers weighty reasons, we have 
resolved, by and with the advice and consent of 
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, 
in Parliament assembled, to take upon ourselves 
the government of the territories in India, hereto- 
fore administered in trust for us by the Honourable 
East India Company. 

Now, therefore, ^we do by these presents notify 
and declare that, by the advice and consent afore- 
said, we have taken upon ourselves the said govern- 
ment ; and we hereby call upon all our subjects 
within the said territories to be faithful, and to 



PROCLAMATION BY THE QUEEN, 1858 383 

bear true allegiance to us, our beirs and successors, 
and to submit themselves to the authority of those 
whom we may hereafter, from time to time, see fit 
to appoint to administer the government of our 
said territories, in our name and on our behalf. 

And we, reposing especial trust and confidence 
in the loyalty, ability, and judgement of our right 
trusty and well-beloved cousin Charles John, 
Viscount Canning, do hereby constitute and appoint 
him, the said Vicount Canning, to be our first 
Viceroy and Governor-General in and over our 
said territories,, and to administer the government 
thereof in our name, and generally to act in our 
name and on our behalf, subject to such orders and 
regulations as he shall, from time to time, rec^eive 
through one of our Principal Secretarfes of State. 

And we do hereby confirm in their several offices, 
civil and military, all persons now employed in the 
service of the Honourable East India Company, 
subject to our future pleasure, and to such laws 
and regulations as may hereafter be enacted. 

Wo* hereby announce to the native princes of 
India, that all treaties and engagements made 
with them by or under the authority of the East 
India Company are by us accepted, and will be 
scrupulously maintained, and we look for the like 
observance on their part. 

We desire no extension of our present terri- 
torial possessions ; and, while we will permit no 
aggression upon our dominions or our rights to be 
attempted with impunity, we'^ shall sanction no 
encroachment on those of others. 

We shall respect the rights, dignity, and honour 
oi native princes as our own ; and we desire that 
they, as well as our own subjects, should enjoy 



m PROOLAMATION BY THE QUEEN, 1858 

that prosperity and that social advancement which 
can only be secured by internal peace and good 
government. 

We hold ourselves bound to the natives of our 
Indian territories by the same obligations of duty 
which bind us to all our other subjects, and those 
obligations, by the blessing of Almighty God, we 
shall faithfully and conscientiously fill. 

Firmly relying ourselves on the truth of Christi- 
anity, and acknowledging with gratitude the solace 
of religion, we disclaim alike the right and the desire 
to impose our convictions on any of our subjects. 
We declare it to be our royal will and pleasure that 
none be in any wise favoured, none molested or 
disquieted, by reason of their religious faith or 
observances', but that all shall alike enjoy the equal 
and impartial protection of the law ; and we do 
strictly charge and enjoin all those who may be in, 
authority under us that they abstain from'a;!! 
interference with the religious belief or worship 
of any of our subjects on pain of our highest 
displeasure. 

And it is our further will that, so far as may ]be, 
our subjects, of whatever race or creed, be freely 
and impartially admitted to office in our service, 
the duties of which they may be qualified by their 
education, ability, and integrity duly to discharge. 

We know, and respect, the feelings of attachment 
with which the natives of India regard the lands 
inherited by them from their ancestors, and we 
desire to protectr them in all rights connected 
therewith, subject to the equitable demands of the 
State ; and we will that generally, in framing and 
administering the law, due regard be paid to the 
ancient rights, usages, and customs of India. 



PROCLAMATION BY THE QUEEN, 1858 385 

We deeply lament the evils and misery which 
have been brought upon India by the acts of 
ambitious men, who have deceived their country- 
men by false reports, and led them into open 
rebellion. Our power has been shown by the 
suppression of that rebellion in the field ; we desire 
to show our mercy by pardoning the offences of 
those who have been misled, but who desire to 
return to the path of duty. 

Already, in one province, with a desire to stop 
the further effusion of blood, and to hasten the 
pacification of our Indian dominions, our Viceroy 
and Governor-General has held out the expectation 
of pardon, on certain terms, to the great majority 
of those who, in the late unhappy disturbances, 
have been guilty of offences against our Govern- 
ment, and has declared the punishment which will 
be inflicted on those whose crimes ])lace them 
beyond the reach of forgiveness. We approve and 
confirm the said act of our Viceroy and Governor- 
General, and do further announce and proclaim as 
follows : 

Our clemency will be extended to all offenders, 
save and except those who have been, or shall be, 
convicted of having directly taken part in the 
murder of British silbjects. With regard to such 
the demands of justice forbid the exercise of mercy. 

To those who have willingly given asylum to 
murderers, knowing them to such, or who may 
have acted as leaders or instigators of revolt, their 
lives alone can be guaranteed ; but, in apportioning 
the penalty due to such persons, full consideration 
will be given to the circumstances under which th*ey 
have been induced to throw off their allegiance ; 
and large indulgence will be shown to those whose 



386 PROCLAMATION BY THE QUEEN, 1858 

crimes may appear to have originated in too 
credulous acceptance of the false reports circulated 
by designing men. 

To all others in arms against the Government 
we hereby promise unconditional pardon, amnesty, 
and oblivion of all ofiences against ourselves, our 
crown and dignity, on their return to their homes 
and peaceful pursuits. 

It is our royal pleasure that these terms of grace 
and amnesty should be extended to all those who 
comply with these conditions before the first day 
of January next. 

When, by the blessing of Providence, internal 
tranquillity shall be restored, it is our earnest 
desire to stinjnulate the peaceful industry of India, 
to promote works of public utility and improve- 
ment, and to administer the government for the 
benefit of all our subjects resident therein. In 
their prosperity will be our strength, in their con- 
tentment our security, and in their gratitude our 
best reward. And may the God of all powder grant; 
to us, and to those in authority under us, strength 
to carry out these our wishes for the good of our 
people. 


END OF VOl. I 



A LIST OF TFIE 


WORLD’S 

CLASSICS 

Oxford University Press 





THE WORLD’S CLASSICS 

A SERIES in constant progress, containing over 
four hundred volumes, and offering in a size 
adapted for the pocket, and at a low price, the most 
famous works in the English language, with more 
than a few translations. Many of the volumes con- 
tain introductions by the best modern writers. 

POCKET SIZE, 6x3! inches (as this list). Large 
type, on thin opaque paper, in superfine art cloth. 

A NUMBER of the volumes are also obtainable in 
Pebble grain Moroccoette and in Natural grain 
Morocco. These are specially recommended for 
presentation. 

THE VOLUMES are obtainable through any book- 
seller. 

IN THE FOLLOWING LIST the books arc classi- 
fied as below : 

Anthologies Letters 

Autobiography Literary Criticism 

Biography Philosophy and Science 

Classics-Greek and Roman Poetry 
Drama Politics ^ Political Theory ^ 

Essays and Belles Lettres and Political Economy 
Fiction (Short Stories are Religion 
grouped separately) Short Stories 
History Travet and Topography 

AN INDEX OF AUTHORS is given at the end of 
the list. 



THE 

WORLD’S CLASSICS 

PRINTED ON OXFORD INDIA PAPER 

The following Works are obtainable in superfine 
maroon cloth, gilt lettered on back, 
gilt top, and marker. 

TWO VOLUMES IN ONE 
Borrow. Lavengro and Romany Rye. 

Maude (Aylmer). Life of Tolstoy. 

Tolstoy. Anna Karenina. Translated by Louise 
and Aylmer Maude, 

Trollope. The Duke’s Children. 

„ Last Chronicle of Barset. 

„ Orley Farm. 

„ Phineas Finn. 

„ Phineas Redux. 

„ The Prime Minister. 

THREE VOLUMES IN ONE 

Dante. The Divine Comedy. Italian text and 
translation by M. B, Anderson, 

English Short Stories (Nineteenth and Twentieth 
Centuries). 

Rabelais (Francois). Gargantua and Pantagrucl. 
Tolstoy. War and Peace. Revised translation by 
Louise and Aylmer Maude. 



4 


*THE WORLD'S CLASSICS* 


COMPLETE LIST OF THE SERIES 

^ Anthologies 

A Book of Amioiican Verse. Selected and edited by A. C. Ward 

(428). 

A Book of Narrative Verse. Compiled by P. H. Collins* Intro- 
duction by Edmund Blunden (350). 

A Book of Scottish Vtrse. Compiled by R. L. Mackie (417). 

American Criticism. Representative Literary Essays. Chosen 
by Norman Foerster (354). 

English Essays, chosen and arranged by IV* Peacock (32). 

English Essays, 1600-1900, chosen by S. V. Makower and B. H. 
Blackwell (172). 

English Essays, Modern. Two Series. Selected by H, S, 
Milford (280, 406). 

English Prose from mandeville to ruskin, chosen and arranged 
by W. Peacock (45). 

English Prose, chosen and arranged by W. Peacock in 5 volumes : 
I, WYCLIFFE to clarendon ; II, MILTON to GRAY; III, WAL- 
POLE to LAMB ; IV, LANDOR tO HOLMES; V, MRS. GASKELL tO 
HENRY JAMES (219-23). 

English Prose, tNarrativc, Descriptive, Dramatic (malory to 
STEVENSON), Compiled by H. A. Treble {204). 

English Short Stories (Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries), 
selected by H. S. Milford. Three Series (193, 228, 315). 

English Songs and Ballads, compiled by 7 ’. W. Ji. Lrosland. 
New edition, with the text revised, and additional poems (13). 

English Verse. Edited by W, Peacock. 1 , Early Lyrics to Shake- 
speare (308); II, campion to the Ballads (309); 111 , dryden 
to WORDSWORTH (310); IV, SCOTT tO ELIZABETH BROWNING 
(3*1); V, LONGFELLOW tO RUPERT BROOKE (3 1 2 ). 

Letters written in War-time (P'ifteenth to Nineteenth Cen- 
turies), selected and arranged by H. Wragg (202). 

A Miscellany of Tracts and Pamphlets. Sixteenth to Nine- 
teenth Centuries. Edited by A. C. Ward (304). 

Palcrave’s Golden Treasury, with 188 pages ot additional poems 
from LANDOR to blunden (133). ‘ 

Reading at Random. A ‘ World’s Classics ’ Anthology. Edited 
by Ben Ray Redman (410). ' 

^ Autobiography 

Aksakoff (Serghei). Trans, by^. D. Duff. A Russian Gentleman 
(241). Years ot Childhood (242). A Russian Schoolboy (261). 

Cellini (Benvenuto) (300). 

DeQuincey (Thomas). Confessions of an Opium-Eater (23), 

Frmi'Klin (Benjamin). The Autobiography, edited from his 
original manuscript by John Bigelow (250). 

Gibbon (Edward), Autobiography. Introduction by B. Bury 
U 39 )» 



AUTOBIOGRAPHY. BIOGRAPHY. THE ‘CLASSICS* s 

Haydon (Benjamin Robert). The Autobiography. Introduc- 
tion and Epilogue by Edmund Blundeu (314X 
Hunt (Leigh). Autobiography. Intro. Edmund Blunden (329). 
Mill (Jc hn Stuart). Autobiography. Introduction by Harold J. 
Laski (262). 

Tolstoy. A Confession, and What I believe. Translated by 
Aylmer Maude (iag). 

Trollope (ANTrioNV). Autobiography. Introduction by 
Michael Sadleir (239). 


If Biography 

Carlyle. The Life of John Sterling. Introduction by W, Hale 
White Mark Rutherford*) (144). 

Crabbe, Life of. By his Son. Introduction by E, M. Forster 

(404). 

Dobson (Austin). Four Frenchwomen: Charlotte Corday, 
Madame Roland, Princess de Lamballe, Madame de Genlis 
(248). 

Emerson. Representative Men. (With Enfjltsh Traits) (30). 
Francis of Assisi (.St.). ’^I'hc Little Flowens; and I'hc Life of 
Brother Giles. Translated into English vcis^by jfames Rhoades 
(265). 

Gaskell (Mrs.). The Life of Charlotte BrontS (2x4). 

Houghton (Lord). Life of Keats (364). 

Johnson (Samuel). Lives of the Poets. 2 vols. (83, 84). 

Maude (Aylmer). Life of 'Folstoy. 2 vols. (383, 384). 

Scott (Sir Walter). Lives of the Novelists. Introduction by 
Austin Dobson (94). 

Trevelyan (Sir G. O.). Life of Macaulay. With a new Intro- 
duction by G. M. Trevelyan, 2 vols. (401, 402). 

Walton (Izaak). Lives of Donne, Wotton, Hooker, Herbert, 
Sanderson. Introduction by George Saintsbury (303). 


^ The ‘ Classics \ Greek and Roman 

Aeschylus. The Seven Plays. Translated into English Verse by 
Lexjois Campbell (1x7). 

Aristophanes. 'I’he Acharnians, Knights, Birds, and Frogs, 
Translated by , 7 . Hookham Frere. Intro. W. W. Merry (134). 
Homer. Translated by Rope, Iliad (^). Odyssey (36). 
Sophocles. The Seven Plays, Translated into English Verae by 
Lewis Campbell (116). 

Virgil. The Aeneid, Georgies, and Eclogues. TranslatfitJ by 
John Dryden (37). 

The Aeneid, Georgies, and Eclogues. Translated by 

James Rhoades (227). 



6 


!THE WORLD’S CLASSICS’ 


t Drama 

Browning (Rodert). Poems and Plays, 1833-42 (58). 

Congreve (William). Complete Works. 2vol8. Introduction by 
Bonamy Dobrde. 1 , The Comedies. II, 'I’he Mourning Bride, 
with Letters, Poems, and Miscellanies (276, 277). 

EighTi ENTH Century Comedy, farquhar's Beaux’ Stratagem, 
Steele’s Conscious Lovers, gay’s Beggar’s Opera, Fielding’s 
Tom Thumb, goldsmith’s She Stoops to Conquer (292). 

Eighteenth Century, Lesser Comedies of the. Edited by 
Allardyce Nicoll The live comedies are Arthur murphy’s The 
Way to keep liim, george colman’s The Jealous Wife, MRS. 
INCHBALd’s Everyone has his Fault, tiiomas morton’s Speed 
the Plough, and Frederick Reynolds’s '^Phe Dramatist (321). 

Elizabethan Tragedif.s. Edited by A. K. Mclkvraith. Con- 
tains sackvillb and Norton’s Gorboduc ; marlowe’s Dr. 
Faustus; Arden of Feversham; kyd’s Spanish Tragedy ; hey- 
wood’s Woman Killed with Kindness (452). 

Five Elizabethan Comedies. Edited by A. K. Mcllwraith, Con- 
tains Greene’s Friar Bacon and F'riar Bungay, peele’s The Old 
Wives’ Tale, lyly’s Campaspe, dekker’s Shoemaker’s Holiday, 
and the anonymous Merry Devil of Edmonton (422). 

E'ive PRE-SnAKEsnmREAN CoMEDiES. Edited by F. S, Boas. Con- 
tains mfdwall’s Fulgens and Lucrece, HBYwooo’sThe FourPP., 
udall’s Ralph Roister Doister, the anonymous Gammer Gurton’s 
Needle, and Gascoigne’s Supposes (4 18). 

Goethe Faust, Parts I and II (380). 

Ibsen, Henrik. Peer Gynt. Trans, with an Introduction by 
R. Ellis Roberts (446). 

Marlowe’s Dr. f austus (with goethh’s Faust, Part I) (135). 

Res roRATiON Tragedies, dryden’s All for Love, otway’s Venice 
Preserved, southerne’s Oroonoko, rowe’s Fair Penitent, and 
Addison’s Cato. Introduction by Bonamy Dobr^e (313). 

Shakespeare. Plays and Poems. 9 vols. Comedies. 3 vols. 
(100, loi, 102). Histories and Poems. 3 vols. (103, 104, 105). 
Tragedies. 3 vols. (106, 107, 108). 

Shakespeare, Si.x Plays by Contem^raries of. dekker, The 
Shoemaker’s Holiday ; WEBSTER, Tne White Devil ; Beau- 
mont and FLETCHER, The Knight of the Burning Pestle, and 
Phiiaster; Webster, The Duchess of I 4 alfi; massinger, A 
New Way to pay Old Debts. Edited by C. B. Wheeler (199). 

Sheridan. Plays. Introduction by (79). 

Tolstoy. The Plays. Tr. by Louise and Aylmer Maude (243). 


^ Essays and Belles Lettres 

BacoVi. The Essays, Civil and Moral (24); 

Carlyle. On Heroes and Hero- Woiship (62). Past and Present, 
Introduction by G. K. Chesterton (153). Sartor Uesartus (19.) 



ESSAYS AND BELLES LETTRES 7 

Dobson (Austin). At Prior Park, &c. (259). Eighteenth- Century 
Vignettes. Three Series (245-7). Four Frenchwomen (248). 
Old Kensington Palace, &c.(258). A Paladin of Philanthropy, &cw 
(256). Rosalba’s Journal, &c. (260). Side- Walk Studies (257). 
Emerson. English I'raits, and Representative Men {30). Essays (6), 
English Critical Essays. 3 volumes : 1 , Sixteenth to Eighteenth 
Centuries; II, Nineteenth Century; III, Twentieth Century 
(240, 206, 405). 

English Essays, chosen and arranged by W. Peacock (32). 

(A Book of), 1600-1900(172). 

Modern. Two Series. Selected by //. S. Milford ( 280, 406). 

English Prose, mandevillb to ruskin. Chosen by W. Peacock 
(45). Also a selection in 5 volumes by the same editor: I, WY- 
CLIFFE to clarendon (219); II, MILTON tO GRAY (22o); 111 , WAL- 
POLE tO LAMB (22 I ) *, IV,LANDORtonOLMES(222); V,MRS.GASKBLL 
to HENRY JAMES (223). 

English Prose. Narrative, Descriptive, and Dramatic (204). 
Froude(J. a.). Short Studies on Great Subjects. Series I (269). 
Hazlitt (William). Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays (205). 
The English Comic Writers (124). Sketches and Essays. 
Essays on Men and Manners (15). Table-Talk (5), The Spirit 
of the Age (57). Wintcrslow (25). 

Holmes (Oliver Wendell). The Autocrat^of the Breakfast- 
I’able (61). The Poet at the Breakfast-Taoie (95). The Pro- 
fessor at the Breakfast-Table (89). 

Horne (R. H.). A New Spirit of the Age (127). 

Hunt (LHiGii). Essays and Sketches (i 15). 

Irving (Washington). The Sketch Book (173). 

Lamb. Essays of hlia, and The Last Essays of Elia (2). 

Landor, Imaginary Conversations. Selected (196), 

Milton. Selected Prose (293). 

Montaigne’s Essays. Florio’s translation, 3 vols. (65, 70, 77). 
Reynolds (Sir Joshua). The Discourses, &c. (149). 

Ruskin. {Ruskin House Editions, by arrangement with Messrs, 
Allen & Unwin, Ltd,) *A Joy for Ever’, and The Two Paths. 
Illustrated (147). Sesame and Lilies, and Ethics of the Dust 
(145). Time and Tide, and The Crown of Wild Olive (146). 
Unto this Last, and Mtinera Pulvcris (148). 

Rutherford (Mark). Pages from a Journal (358). 

Sermons, Selected Ekeusn, from latimer to r, w. dale (464). 
Smith (Alexander). Dreamthorp, &c. (200). 

Smollett. T ravels through France and Italy (90); 

Sterne (Laurence). A Sentimental journey (333), 

Stevenson (R.L.). VlrginibusPuehsq^c; Across the Plains (296). 
Thoreau. Walden (68). 

Tolstoy. Translated by A. Maude, Recollections and Essays 
(459). * What is Art?’ and Essays on Art (331). •• 

Tracts and Pamphlets, from john knox to h. g . wblls (304). 
Walton and Cotton. The Compleat Angler (430). 



8 ‘ THE WORLD’S CLASSICS • 

White (Gilbert). The Natural History of Selborne (aa). 
Whitman. Specimen Days in America (371). 

^ Fiction (For Short Stories see separate heading) 

Ainsworth (W. Harrison). The Tower of London (i6a). 
Austen (Jane). Emma (129). Pride and Prejudice (335). Mans- 
field Park (345). Northanger Abbey (355). Persuasion (356). 
Sense and Sensibility (389). 

Blackmorf(R D.). Lorna Doonc (171). 

Borrow (George). Lavengro (66). The Romany Rye (73). 
BrontIj (Anne). Agnes Grey (141). 'Penant of Wildfell Hall 

(67). 

Bbont§ (Charlotte). Jane Eyre (i). Shirley (14). Villette (47). 

The Professor, and the Poems of the Brontes (78). 

BRONTii (Emily). Wuthering Heights (10). 

Bunvan. The Pilgrim’s Progress (12). Mr. Badman (338). 
Butler (Samuel). 'Fhe Way of all Flesh (438). 

Cervantes. Don Quixote. 2 volumes (130, 131). 

CoBEOLD (Rev. Richard). Margaret Catchpole (i 19). 

Collins (Wilkie). The Moonstone. Introduction by T. S. 

Eliot (316). The Woman in White (226). 

Cooler (J. Fenimore). The Last of the Mohicans (163). 
Defoe. Captain Singleton (82). Robinson Crusoe. Part I (17). 
Dickens. Barnaby Rudge(286). Christmas Books (307). Edwin 
Drood (263). Cjreat Expectations (128). Hard Times (264). 
Old Curiosity Shop (270). Oliver Twist (8). Pickwick Papers. 
2 volumes (120. 121). Tale of Two Cities (38). 

Disraeli (Binjamin). Coningsby (381). Sybil (291). 

Douglas (G.). The House with the Green Shutters, Intro, by 
W. Somerset Maugham (466). 

Eliot (George). Adam Bede (63). Felix Holt (179). The Mill 
on the h'loss (31). Romola (178), Scenes of Clerical Life (155), 
Silas Marner, &c. (80). 

Fielding. Jonathan Wild (382). Joseph Andrews (334). 

Galt (John). The Entail (177). 

Gaskell (Mrs.). Cousin Phillis, and Other Tales, &c. (168). 
Cranford, I'he Cage at Cranford, aijd The Moorland Cottage 
(no). Lizzie Leigh, The Grey Woman, and Other Tales, &c. 
(175). Mary Barton (86). North and South (154). Right at 
Last, and Other Tales, &c. (203). R'ound the Sofa (190), 
Ruth (88). Sylvia’s Lovers (156). Wives and Daughters (157). 
Goldsmith. The Vicar of Wakefield (4). 

Harris (Joel Chandler). Uncle Remus (361). 

Hawthorne. House of ^he Seven Gabies (273). The Scarlet 
Letter (26). Tales (319)* 

Holme (Constance). Beautiful End (431). Crump Folk going 
Hmne (419). He-who-came? (440). The Lonely Plough (390). 
The Old Road from Spain (400). The Splendid Fairing (416). 

The Things which Belong (425). The Trumpet in the 

Dust (409). The Wisdom of the Simple, &c. (453). 



FICTION 9 

Kingsley (Henry). Geoffry Hamlyn ( 270 * Ravenshoe (267). 
Austin Elliot (407). 

La Motte Fouqlt6. Undine, Sintram, &c. (408). 

LeFanu(J. S.). Uncle Silas. Introduction by MonlaguaJi.Jafnes 
(306). 

Lesage. Gil Bias. 2 vols. (151, 152). 

Mackenzie (Compton). Guy and Pauline. With new Introduc- 
tion by the Author (461). 

Marhyat. Mr. Midshipman Easy (160). Jacob Faithful (439). 

Melville (Herman). Moby Dick (225). Typee(274). Omoo 
(275). While Jacket (253). 

Morier (J. J.). Hajji Baba (238). Hajji Baba in England (285). 

Peacock (T. L.). Headlong Hall ; and Nightmare Abbey (339.) 
Misfortunes of Elphin; and Crotchet Castle (244). 

Rabelais. Gargantua and Pantagrucl. 3 volumes ^11-13). 

Scott. Ivanhoe (29). 

Smollett. Roderick Random (353). Humphry Clinker (290); 

Sterne. Sentimental Journey (333). Tristram Shandy (40). 

STEVEN.SON ( R. L.). Kidnapped ; and Catriona (297). The Master 
of Ballantrae (441). Treasure Island 

Sturgis (Howard). Belchamber. Introduction by Gerard Hop-' 
kins (429). 

Swift. Gulliver’s Travels (20). 

SwiNNEHTON (Frank). Noctumc. With new introduction by 
the Author (460). 

Taylor < Meadows). Confessions of a Thug (207); 

Thackeray. Henry Esmond (28). 

Tolstoy. Translated by Louise and Aylmer Maude. Anna 
Karenina. 2 volumes (210, 211). Childhood, Boyhood, and 
Youth (352). The Cossacks, &c. (208). Iv 4 n Ilych, and Hadji 
Mur 4 d (432). The Kreutzer Sonata, &c. (266). Resurrection, 
trails, by L. Maude Twenty-three Tales (72). War and 

Peace. 3 volumes (233-5). 

Trollope. American Senator (391). Ayala’s Angel (342). Bar- 
chester Towers (268). I'he Belton Estate (2 t;i). TbeClavchn^ 
(252). Cousin Henry (343). Doctor Thorne(2Q8). Dr.Wortle’s 
School (317)* The Dune’s Children. 2 vols. (462, 463). The 
Eustace Diamonds (357). Framley Parsonage (305). The 
Kellys and the O’ Kellys (341). Lady Anna (443). Last 
Chronicle of Barset. 2 vols. (398, 390). Miss Mackenzie 
(278). Orley Farm. 2 vols. (423, 424). Phineas Finn. 2 vols. 
(447, 448). Phineas Redux. 2 vols. (450, 451). The Prime 
Minister. 2 vols. (454, 455). Rachel Ray (279). Sir Harry 
Hotspur (336). 'Pales ot all Countries (397). The Three 
Clerks (140). The Warden (217). The Vicar of Bullhampton 
(272). 

Walpole (Hugh). Prelude to Adventure. With new Intrgfluc- 
tion by the Author (465). 

Watts- Dunton (TiiFononn). Aylwin (52). 

Wharton (Edith). The House of Mirth ( 437 )* 



xo 


'THE WORLD’S CLASSICS* 


History 

Barrow (Sir John), The Mutiny of the Bounty (iqs). 

Buckle. The History of Civilization. 3 volumes (41, 48, 53); 
Carlyle. The French Revolution. Introduction by C, R* L, 
Fletcher. 2 volumes (125, 126). 

Froude (J. a.). Short Studies on Great Subjects. Series I (269). 
Gibbon. Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. With Maps. 

7 volumes (35, 44, 51, 55, 64, 69, 74;. 

Irving (Washington). Conquest of Granada (150). 

Macaulay. History of England. 5 volumes (366-70). 
Motley. Rise of the Dutch Republic. 3 volumes (96, 97, 98). 
Prescott (W. H.). The Conquest of Mexico, 2vols. (197,198). 

f Letters 

Burke. Letters. Selected, with Introduction, by//. 7 - (237)- 
Chesterfield. Letters. Selected, with an Introduction, by 
Phyllis M. Jones (347). 

Congreve. Letters, in Volume II. Sec under Drama (277). 
CowPER. Letters. Selected, with Intro., by E. V. Lucas (138); 
Duffertn (Lord). Letters from High Latitudes. Illustrated (158). 
Gray homas). f ^Letters. Selected by John Beresford (283). 

Johnson (Samuel). Letters. Selected, with Introduction, by 
R. W. Chapman (282). 

Southey. Selected Letters (169). 

White (Gilbert). The Natural History of Selborne (22). 


^ Literary Criticism 

American Criticism, Representative Literary Essays, Chosen 
by Norman Foerster (354). 

Coleridge (S T.) Lectures on Shakespeare (363). 

English Critical Essays. Selected and edited by Edmund Di 
Jones. 2 volumes: 1 , Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries (240); 
11 , Nineteenth Century (206). 

Hazlitt (William). Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays. Intro- 
duction by Sir A. T. Quiller-Couch (205). Lectures on the 
English Comic Writers. 1 ntroduction ^^by R. BrimLey Johnson 
(124). Lectures on the English Poets (251;). The Spirit of the 
Age. (Essavs on his contemporaries) (57). 

Hornl (R. H.). A New Spirit of the Age (127). 

Johnson (Samuel) Lives of the Poets. 2 volumes (83, 84), 

More (Paul Elmer). StJected Shelburne Essays (434). 

Sainte-Beuve. Causeries du Lundi. (In English.) Two Series 
( 372 '- 3 )- „ . , 

SHiJffESPFARF Criticism, (heminge and condell to carlylb.) 
Selected and introduced by D. Nichol Smith (212). 

Shakespeafb Criticism (19x9-1935). Selected and introduced 
by Anne Bradby (436). 



11 


SCIENCE AND POETRY 

f Philosophy and Science 

(For Political Theory and Religion see separate headings) 

Aurelius (Marcus). Thoughts. Translated by ^o/in (6o). 

Bacon. The Advancement of Learning, and the New Atlantis. 

Introduction by trojessor Case (93). Essays (24). 

Carlyle. Sartor Kesartus (19). 

Darwin. I’hc Origin of Species. With a new preface by Major 
Leonard Darwin ( 1 1 ). 

Reynolds (Sir Joshua). Discourses, Ac. Introduction by 
son (149), 

Tolstoy. What then must we do ? Trans, by A. Maude (281). 
White (Gilbert). U'he Natural History of Sclborno (22). 


^ Poetry 

Arnold (Matthew). Poems, 1849-67 (85). 

Barham (Richard). I'he Ingoldsby Legends (9),' 

Blake (William). Selected Poems (324). 

Bronte Sisters, 'I'he. The Professoi , by charlotte rrontS, and 
Poems by charlotte, emily, and annb brontII (78). 

Browning (Elizabeth Barrett). Poems. Ag^elcction (176). 

Browning (Robert). Poems and Plays, 1833-42 (58). Pocms» 
1842-64 (137). 

Burns (Pobert). Poems (34). Complete and in large type. 

Byron, l^oems. A Selection (180). 

Chaucer, The Works of. 3 volumes: I (42); TI (56); III, con- 
taining the whole of the Canterbury Tales (76). 

Coleridge. Poems. Introduction by 6 ir.^ 4 . 7 *. Qwi 7 /er-CoMcft (99). 

Congreve (William). Complete works in 2 volumes. Intro- 
ductions by Honamy Dobree, I, The Comedies (270); U, The 
Mourning Bride, Poems, Miscellanies and Letters (277). 

Dante. Italian text and Fnglish verse-translation by Melville B, 
Anderson, on facing pages, with notes. 3 vols. (392-4). 
Translation only, with notes, in one volume (395). 

Dobson (Austin). Selected Poems U49). 

English Songs and Ballads. Compiled by T. W, H. Crosland, 
New edition, with revised text and additional poems, 1927 (13). 

English Verse. Vo 1 sj»I-V ; Early Lyrics to Shakespeare; cam- 
pion to the Ballads; dryden to W'ORdsworth; scott to k. b. 
BROWNING ; LONGFELLOW to RUPERT BROOKE. Edited by William 
Peacock (308-3 1 2). 

I'bancis of Assisi (St.). The Little Flowers of St. Francis. 
Translated into English Verse hy J a Aes Rhoades (265). 

Goethe. Faust, Parts 1 and II. Translated by Bayard Taylor, 
Intro, by Marshall Montgomery and notes by Douglas Yatesi^So), 

Golden Trea^iury, The. With additional Poems ti33). 

Goldsmith. Poems. Introduction by Austin Dobson ( 1 23). 

Herbert (George). Poems. Introduction by Wai^h{iO^)i 

Herrick (Robert). Poems (16). 



12 ’THE WORLD’S CLASSICS* 

Homer. Translated by Po/>«. Iliad (i8). Odyssey (36), 

Hood. Poems. Introduction by (87). 

Ibsen. Peer Gynt. Translated by JR. Ellis Roberts (446). 

Keats. Poems (7). 

Keblb. I'he Christian Year (181). 

Longfellow. Hiawatha, Miles Standish, Tales of a Wayside 
Inn, &c. (174). 

Macaulay. Lays of Ancient Rome ; Ivry ; The Armada (27). 

Marlowe. Dr. Faustus (with goethe’s Faust, Part I, trans. 
y, Anster). Introduction by Sir A. W. Ward (135). 

Milton. The English Poems (182). 

Morris (William). I’he Defence of Gueneverc, Life and Death 
of Jason, and other Poems (183). 

Narrative Verse, A Book of. Compiled by V. H, Collim. 
With an Introduction by Edmund Blunden (350). 

Nekrassov. 7 'rans. by Juliet Soskice. Who can be happy and free 
in Russia ? A Poem (213). Poems (340). 

Palgrave. The Golden Treasury. With additional Poems (i 33). 

Rossetti (Christina). Goblin Market, &c. (184). 

Scott (Sir Walter). Selected Poems (186). 

Scottish Verse, A Book of. Compiled by R.L. Mackie (417). 

Shakespeare. Plays and Poems. Preface by A. C. Swinburne, 
Introductions hv Edward Dowden. 9 volumes. Comedies. 3 
volumes (100, Yor, 102). Histories and Poems. 3 volumes 
(103, 104, 105). Tragedies. 3 volumes (106, 107, 108). 

Shelley. Poems. A Selection (187). 

Tennyson. Selected Poems. Intro, by Sir Herbert Warren (3). 

Virgil. The Aeneid, Georgies, and Eclogues. Translated by 
Dryden (37). Translated by James Rhoades (227). 

Wells (Charles). Joseph and his Brethren. A Dramatic Poem. 
Intro, by A, C. Swinburne, and Note by T. Watts- bunton{i^'i). 

Whitman. A Selection. Introduction by E, de Selincourt (218). 

Whittier. Poems : A Selection (188). 

Wordsworth. Poems: A Selection (189). 

^ Politics^ Political Economy, Political Theory 

Bagehot (Walter). The English Constitution, With an Intro- 
duction by the Earl of Balfour (330). 

Buckle. The History of Civilization. 3 .volumes (41, 48, 53), 

Burke (Edmund). Letters. Selected, with an Introduction, by 
Harold J. Laski (237). Works. 6 volumes. 1 : A Vindica- 
tion of Natural Society; The Sublime and Beautiful, &c. (71). 
II; The Present Discontents; and Speeches and Letters on 
America (81). Ill : Spl^cches on India, &c. (i 1 1). IV: Writings 
on France, 1790-1 ( 1 12). V : Writings on Ireland, &c.(i 13). VI; 
A Letter to a N oble Lord ; and Letters on a Regicide Peace ( 1 1 4). 

ENtfcLSH Speeches, from burke to Gladstone. Selected and 
edited by E, R, Jones (191). 

Macaulay. Speeches. Selected, with Introduction and footnotes, 
by G. M. Young (433). 



13 


POLITICS, RELIGION. ETC, 

Machiavelli. The Prince (43). 

Maine (Sir Henry). Ancient Law (362). 

Mill (Jotn Stuart). On Liberty, Representative Government, 
and the Subjection of Women (170). 

Milton(John). Selected Prose. Intro. Mn/co/w IP. Wallace 
Ruskin. ‘A loy for Ever’, and The Two Paths. Illustrated (147)* 
Time and Tide, and The Crown of Wild Olive (146). Unto 
this Last, and Muncra Pulveris (148). 

Smith (Adam). The Wealth of Nations. 2 volumes (54, 59). 
Speeches and Documents on British Colonial Policy (1763- 
1917). Ed. A. B. Keith. 2 volumes (215, 216). 

Speeches AND Documents on the British Dominions, 1918-31. 

Selected, with Introduction, by A. B. Keith (403). 

Speeches and Documents on Indian Policy (1756-1921). 

Edited, with Introduction, by A. B. Keith (231. 232). 
Speeches and Docu.ments on International Affairs (1918- 
37). Edited by A. B. Keith. 2 vols. (457, 458). 

Speeches on British Foreign Policy ( 1738-1914) (201). 
Tolstoy. What then must we do ? Translated, with an Intro- 
duction, by Aylmer Maude 

Tracts and Pamphlets, A Miscellany of. SiKteenth to Nine- 
teenth Centuries, Edited by A. C. Ward (304), 

Religion 

The Old Testament. Revised Version. 4 vols. (385-8). 
Apocrypha, The, in the Revised Version (294). 

The Four Gospels, and the Acts op the Apostles, Authorized 
Version f'?44). 

The New 'Pestambnt. Revised Version (346), 

A Kempis (Thomas). Of the Imitation of (!;)hrist (49). 

Aurelius (Marcus). 'I’ranslated by John Jackson (60). 

Bunyan. The Pilarirn’s Progress (12). Mr Hadman (338). 
Confucius. The Analects. I’rans. by W. E. Soothill. Introduction 
by Lady Hosie (442). 

Koran, fnE. Translated by E. H. Palmer (328). 

1 OLSTOY. Translated bv Aylmer Maude, A Confession, and 
What I believe (229). <^n Life, and Essays on Religion (426), 
The Kingdom of God, and Peace Essays (445). 

H Short Stories 

Africa, Stories of. Chosen by E. C. Parnwell (359). 

Austrian Shout Stories. Translated by Marie Busch (337). 
Crime and Detection. Two Senes (301 .351;. atones oy H. c. 
BAILEY, ERNEST BRAMAH, G K. CHESTERTON SIR A CONAN DOYLB, 
R. AUSTIN FREEMAN, W W. JACOBS, EDEN PHILPOTTS, ‘SAPPBH*, 
DOROTHY SAYERS, and Others. 

Czech Tales, Selected. Translated by Marie Busch and^/to 
Pick (288). Nine stories, including two by me brotherz 

CAPEIC. 



14 ‘THE WORLD'S CLASSICS* 

Dickbns. Christmas Books no?). 

Engush Short Stories. Three Series. Selected by H. S. 
Alilford ( 192 , 21$)^ 

French Short Stories. Eighteenth to Twentieth Centuries. 

Selected and translated by K. Rebillon Latnbley (396). 

Gaskell (Mrs.). Introductions by Clement Shorter. Cousin 
Phillis, and Other Tales (168). Lizzie Leigh, The Grey 
Woman, and Other Tales. &c. (175). Right at Last, and Other 
Talcs, &c. (203). Round the Sofa ( 190). 

German Short Stories. Translated by E. N. Bennett 
German Short Stories (Modern). Translated by H. Steinhauer 
and Helen Jessiman (456). 

Ghosts and Marvels and More Ghosts and Marvels. Two 
S clectiors 01 Uncanny Talcs made by V. H. Collins* Intro- 
duction by Montague R. James in Series I (284, 323). 

Harte (Bret). Short Stories (318). 

Hawthorne (Nai hanikl). '1 ales (319). 

Holme (Constance). The Wisdom of the Simple, &c. (453). 
Irving (Washington). T ales (320). 

Persian (From the). The ' 1 ‘hree Dervishes, and Other Stories. 

Tran lated from MSS. in the Bodleian by Reuben Levy (254). 
Poe (Edgar Allan). Tales of Mystery and Imagination (21). 
Polish Tales uy Modern Authors. Translated by Else C. A/. 

Beneckc and Mlirae Busch (230). 

Russian Short Stories. Translated by > 4 . jK. Chamot (287). 
Scott. Short Stories. With an introduction by Lora David 
Cecil (414). 

Short Stories of the South Seas. Selected by E. C. Parmoell 

Spanish Short Stories. Sixteenth Century, In contemporary 
translations, revised, with Introduction, by^. B, Trend (326). 
Tolstoy. Nine Stories (1855-63) (420). Twenty -three Tales. 

Translated hv Louise and Aylmer Maude (72). 

Trollope. Talcs of all Countries (397). 


% Travel and Topography 

Borrow (George). The Bible in Spd^n (75). Wild Wales (224). 

Lavengro (66). The Romany Rye (73). 

Dui-FEHiN li.oKD). Letters from High Latitudes (158), 
Melville (Herman), Typee (294). Omoo (275). 

Morier (J. J.). Hajji Babu of Ispahan. Introduction by C. W. 
Stetcart, and a Map (238). 

Smolleti (Tobias). Travels through France and Italy m 1765. 

Introduction (Ixii pages) by Thomas Seccombe (90), 

Sterne (Laurence). A Sentimental Journey ( 333). 



INDEX OF AUTHORS. ETC, 


Addison. 6. 

Aeschyli^ 

Africa, SWries of, 13. 

Ainsworth (VV. Harrison), 8. 

A Kemnis (Thomas), 13. 

Aksaki ff (Scrghei), 4. 

American Criticism, 4, zo« 
American Verse, 4. 

Ancient Law, n. 

Apocrypha, The (Revised Ver- 
Mon), 13. 

Arisiophanes, S- 
Arnold (Matthew), 11, 

Aurelius (Marcus), ii, 13. 

Austen (Jane), 8. 

Austrian Short Stories, 13. 

Bacon (Francis), ii, 

Bagehot (Walter), 12. 

Barham (Richard), ii. 

Barrow (Sir John), to. 

Beaumont and Fletcher, 6. 
Blackmore (R D.), 8. 

Blake (William), ii. 

Borrow (George), 3, 14. 

British Colonial Policy, 13, 
Foreign Policy, 13. 

Brontd aisters, 8, ix. 

Browning (Eliz. Barrett), XZ. 
Browning (Robert), 6, ix« 

Buckle (T. H.), 10, X2. 

Bunyan (John), 8, 

Burke, 12 . 

Bums (Robert), ii. 

Butler, 8. 

Byron (Lord), xi. 

Carlyle (Thomas), 5, 6, 10. 

CelUni (Benvenuto), 4. 

Cervantes, 8. 

Chaucer, ii. 

Chesterfield, 10. 

Cobbold (Richard), 8. 

Coleridge (S. T.), 10, II. 

Collins (Wilkie), 8. 

Colman, 6. 

Confucius, 13* . • 

Congreve (William), 6, zz. 
Cooper (J. Fenimore), 8. 

Cowper (William), 10. 

Crabbe, 5. 

Crime and Detection, 13. 

Critical Essays, 3, 7, 10. 

Czech Tales, 13. 

Dante, 3,11. 

Darwin (Charles), ti, 

Defoe (Danid), 8« 

Dekker, 6. 

De Quincey (Thomas), 4. 


Dickens (Charles), 8, Z4. 

Disraeli (Benjamin), 8, 

Dobson (Austin). 5, 7, zi* 

Don Quixote, 8. 

Douglas (George), 8. 

Dryaen, 15, 6. 

Duflferin (Lord). 10, r4. 

Eighteenth-Century Comedies, 6, 
Eliot (George), 8. 

Elizabethan Comedies, 6. 
Elizabethan Tragedies, 6. 
Emerson (R. W.), 7. 

English Cl itical jbssays, 7, xo. 
Eaglisn Essays, 3, 4. 

English Prose, 4. 

English Sermons, 7. 

English Shori Stories. 3,4, X4. 
English Songs and Ballads, 4, iz. 
English Speeches, 12, 

English Verse, 4, xz. 

Farquhar, 6. 

Fielding (Henry), 6, 8. 

Four Gospels, 13. 

Francis (St.), iz. 

Franklin (Benjamin), 4. 

French ShortgStories, 14. 

Froude (J. A.), 7. 

Galt (John), 8. 

Gaskcll (Mrs.), 5, 8, 14. 

Gay, 6. 

German Short Stories, X4. 

Ghosts and Marvels, 14, 

Gibbon (Edward), 4, xo. 

Gil Bias, Q. 

Goethe, 6, n, 12. 

Goldsmith (Oliver), 6, 8* xi. 

Gray ('I'homas), 10. 

Harris (J. C.), 8. 

Harte (Bret), 14. 

Hawthorne (Nathaniel), 8, X4. 
Haydon (B. H.), 5. 

Hazlitt (William), 5, 7, xo. 
Herbert (George), ii. 

Herrick (Robert), ii. 

Holme (Constance), 8, 14. 

Holmes (Oliver Wendelij, 7« 
Horner,^, 12. 

Hood ('Hiomas), X2. 

Home (R. H.), 7. 

HougHton (Lord), $• 

Hunt (Leigh) 5,7. 

Ibsen (Henrik), 6, 12. 

Inchbald (Mrs.), 0. 

Ingoldsby Legends, xz. 
International Affairs, 13. 

Irving (Wastungiou), 7, xo, 14* 



z6 


Johnson (Samuel), 5, lo, 

Keats, jz 
Keble (John), la. 

Keith (A B). 13. 

Kingsley (Henry), g. 

Koran. The, 13. 

Lamb (Charles). 7. 

La Motte houqu^ 0* 

Landor (W S ), 7 
Le Fanu 0 S ), 9. 

Lesage, q 

Longfellow (H W ), la. 
Macaulay (T B ), 10, 12. 
Machiavetli 13 
Mackenzie (Compton), q 
M aine, Sir Henry, 1 3 
Marcus Aurelius, II 13. 
Marlowe (Christopher), 6. 12 
Mariyat (Captain), 9 
Massinger, 6 
Maude (Aylmer), 3,? 
Meinholdn W ) 9 
Melville (Herman) 9, 14 
Mill (John Stuart) 5, 13 
Milton (John), 7, 12 
Montaigne 7 v 
More (Paul Elmer) 10. 

Moner (J J ) 9, 14 
Mom8( W.), 12 
Morton, 6 
Motlev 0 • L.), 10 
Murphy, 6. 

Narrative Verse 4, 12. 
Nckrassov, 12 
New Testament, 13. 

Old Testament, 1 3 
(Jtway, 6 

Palgrave (F T ), 4 
Pamphlets and Tracts, 4, 7. 
Peacock (T L ), 9 
Peacock (W ), 4 
Persian (From the) 14 
Poe (Edgar Allan), 14 
Pobsn Tales 14 
Prescott (W H ), 10 
Pre>Shakespearean Comedies, 6 
Rabelais, 3, 9. 

Reading at Random, 4. 

Redman (B R.), 4* 

Restoraiion Tragedies, 6. 
Reynolds (hredenck), 6 


INDEX OF AUTHORS, 

Reynok 
Rossetti , . 
Rowe, 6, 



Sainte-BetMf, f O. 

Scott (Sir W \ 9, t2, 

Scottish Verse, a 12 
Sermons (EngHftt\), 7. 
Shakespeare, ik, iz 
Shakespeare Criticism, xo. 
Shakespeare*i Predecessora asaa 
Contemporartea, 6. 

Shelley, 12 
Shendan (R. R.), 6. 

Smith (Adam), 13 
Smith (Alexander), 7* 
bmollett {T.)« 7, 9, 14> 

SouthSett,%W<t Stories ^ 4 ^ 
Southern^ 6* 

Southey IKObMt), 10. 

Spanish Short Stones, 14. 

Steele, 6 , 

Sterne (Laurel^, 7* 0* 

Stevenson (R. L«h 7# 

SwitiTjonathao), 0. 

Svunnerton (Frank), 

1 aylor (Meadows), 9. 

T ennyson (Lord), t*. 

"I hackerty (W. M )»li, 
'IhoreaUlH D) ^ . 

1 hrec Derviihea, Iw, i» ^ 

Trevelyan, 5. 

Trollope (Aja^ony>f^3^g, !ir 
Virgil, 5, 12. 

Walpole (Hugh), 9 

Walton (Uaag), ^7 . / 

Watts>Dimton Cineodo^i,.te ^ 
Webster, -6» 

Wells (Chgrleah 
Wells (H G.),*. X 
Wharton CB|lrthi|»9i 


Wordawoctlil 


hmuarf I9S8 


Further Volumes ate tn 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRIHU^ 




