Barcode : 99999990229502 

Title - Selection from educational records part i 1781-1839 

Author - Sharp, H. 

Language - english 

Pages - 243 

Publication Year - 1920 

Barcode EAN.UCC-13 





9'999999"022950 



BUREAU OF EDUCATION, INDIA 



SELECTIONS 



EDUCA1 




l>AKT 1 



I78MS39 



H, SHARK C.S.I., CM:. 



M Kil l M 



PREFACE. 



rTlITIS introduction ma}' stand as a preface both to the present 
volume and to the* series of those which it is trusted may 
follow it. 

Requests have often reached me for educational documents which I 
have found it difficult immediately to supply owing to the document 
in question never having been printed or the volume in which it is 
contained being out of print. At the Conference of Directors of 
- Public Instruction which met at Delhi in 1917 I enquired if a reprint 
of important educational records would be useful. The reply was in 
the affirmative/ 15 The Bureau of Education has since that date been 
collecting and sifting such records. Other duties and frequent inter- 
ruptions have prevented me from gathering them together and 
putting them into proper form. The first volume, with records extend- 
ing from the earliest times to 1839, is now ready. It has been particularly 
difficult to prepare ; and it is hoped that succeeding volumes may follow 
more rapidly. 

The early history of education in India is a matter of peculiar 
interest. The efforts of the missionaries, the growth of a consciousness " 
of responsibility for the instruction of the people (at a time when, in 
England, this task was hardly regarded as a public duty), the dawning 
of a recognition of the enormous difficulties involved in such a duty, 
the polemics which led to the momentous decision to introduce the 
western system of learning for the middlfe class — these subjects, linked 
as they are with the names of striking personalities, present a fascinat- 
ing field of study* The story has been told by Trevelyan, Syed Mahmud 
S- Sattianadhan, E. W. Thomas and H. B. James.f 

* Report of the Conference of Directors of Public Instruction, 1911. Delhi; 1917 (p. 20). 
| C, E. Trevelyak, On the Education of the People of India. London, 1838* 

Sykd JfAHMOOD, A History of Education in India, 17S1 to 1893+ Aligarh, 1895, 

S, Sattiit an^ Dif Ax T History of Education in the Madras Picsidcncy. .Madras, 1891. 

F. W. Thomas, The History and Projects of British Education in India, London, 189}, 

IL TL James, Education and Statesmanship in India. London, 1917, 

( Hi } 



iv 



Preface 



The present work is not a history of education /m India. It is a 
reprint of documents. These documents arc, for the convenience of 
the reader and with a view to 1 hoir arrangement, connected by brief 
narratives. But in no sense are these narratives to lie construed as 
forming a history. The important part consists in the documents them- 
selves. Possibly these may yet assist, in guiding some future 
student in the compilation of a history of this subject more elaborate 
than those which have yet appeared. 

Nor is the present collection the first of its kind. Among earlier 
collections may be mentioned the following. An Appendix to the 
Minutes of Evidence of the Select Committee of 1832 on the Affairs of 
the East India Company * contains, in addition to Fisher's Memoir (oi 
which more anon), a number of official papers dealing with early educa- 
tion in India. The Records of the Madras Government edited by 
Arbutlmot in 1855 f contain a valuable record so far as that Presidency 
is concerned, as well as records of more general interest* The collec- 
tion of despatches from the Home Government published in 1870 furnishes 
documents for the period from 1854 to 1SGS.J Howell also in his works§ 
has collected a number of official papers. These books, however, are out 
of print. It is also necessary, in dealing with them, at once to supple- 
ment and to exercise selection. 

This first volume covers the period from about 1781 to 1S39. 
The documents deal with early private enterprise and the activity, first 
of individual servants of the East India Company, then of the Company 
itself ; the foundation of institutions, many ^6f which have survived 

* Minute* of Evidence taken before the tided Committee of the House of Common* on the Affairs 
of the Kant India Company , February htth to July 27th, J. ¥32, 1 Public, Printed by order of tho lion bio 
Court of Directors, London, 1833. (Appendix I.) 

t Selections from the Records of the Madra* Government No. II \ Papers relating to Public Instruct' 
ion 7 corn-prising a memorandum of the proceedings of the Madras Government in the Department of 
Public Instruction with an appendix containing nil the more important papers recorded on the subject* 
Compiled by A, J, Arbutjixot, Madras, 1855. 

J Selections from the Records of the Government of India, Home Department, No. LXXYI, A collection 
of Despatches from the Home Government on the subject of Education in India, 1S5I to ISGS. Calcutta, 
1S70. 

§ P. A. Howell, Education in India, prior to IS5J and in 1S70-7I, Calcutta, 1S72 ; and Note on 
f he state of Education during ISG6-67, Calcutta, 18(58. 



Preface 



v 



in some form or other till to-day ; the first grant in aid of education 
mid ilic machinery devised for utilising it : the surveys made with a 4 
view to a wide dissemination of knowledge; the transfer of public 
interest and public funds from the pursuit of the old learning of 
the east to that of the western literature and science and to the 
study of the English language. Lord Auckland's minute of 1839 
clones not only the controversy between tl c orientalists and the 
occidentalism but also a definite period, characterised by its own theories 
and enterprises — a period of vague but often heroic beginnings, which 
paved the way for the despatch of 1854 and the gradual realisation of 
an ordered policy. 

The arrangement adopted is topical and chronological. This 
seemed desirable in order to bring together documents dealing with the 
pame subject but with some regard to the sequence of their production. 
It does not profess to be perfect, but it is hoped that, on the whole, it 
will conduce to convenience for the reader. A chronological list of 
documents and a short index arc included. When the series is com- 
plete it is proposed to publish a combined list and a combined 
index. There is also a tabular statement of events in India and in the 
general world of thought, which may help to locate and illumine the 
points of progress indicated in t lie .documents. 

The records which have contributed most to the volume are those 
of the Government of India. Tins is natural, since the object is to 
avoid detail and to concentrate on the general and the essential. But 
the record offices of the larger provinces also have been requisitioned 
and have provided useful material. 

The documents themselves occur in four forms. First, there 
are originals. An example of these is document No. 31, which has 
probably never been copied and on -the margin of winch arc still to be 
seen the observations of Macaulay written in his own hand. (The 
observations arc reproduced in the print.) Second, there are early 
prints. Examples of these are numerous ; among them may be 
mentioned documents nos. C, 8, 9, 21, ..etc. Third, there arc x old hand- 
written copies of the originals. Fourlli, there are copies of these or of the 



vi 



Preface 



originals made by the record office. All tliese four, save the first, offer 
difficulties of readings. Even the prints are -not perfect ; the first 
and second prints of Macaulay's Minute contain curious (though 
unimportant) variations. The third class is, not unnaturally, full of 
obvious errors — the result of carelessness in copying or of ignorance. One 
finds f thing ' written for * think/ f last ' for ' lost ' owing ' for 
* owning,' ' conduct ' for ' contact/ ' taught ' for ' thought, f exacted ' 
for ' exalted/ ' execute ' for f excuse/ etc. There are also instances 
of impossible grammar. Such errors have been corrected in the 
present print. ' n the other hand, eccentricities of spelling have 
been preserved ; and no attempt has been made, save in the connect- 
ing narratives, to render spelling consistent. 

A document of particular interest for this period is Fisher's Memoir. 
Though it deals mainly with details and with individual institutions, its 
description of them sheds a flood of light upon the spirit and tendency • 
of the times. I was urged to reprint it in full. At one time I had 
intended to do so. On a further consideration of this point, I have 
come to the conclusion that, in days when economy of printing is for a 
variety of reasons desirable, this course was hardly justifiable. "The 
• arrangement of the Memoir is necessarily defective, dealing as it often 
does twice or thrice over with the same institutions at different stages 
of their development. There is a good deal of material which, while 
it will not repay reprinting, is hardly separable from more valuable 
passages. Lastly, the elaborate statements in tabular form, which 
form one of its most interesting features, are difficult to reproduce. I 
have therefore (apart from allusions in the connecting narratives) put 
the main outlines of this work and some of its more illuminating 
passages into the form of an appendix. 

My thanks are due to Mr. G. R. Kaye, who has zealously assisted 
me in the study and elimination of large numbers of records ~and who 
is responsible for the appendix summarising Fisher's Memoir ; to the 
Records Officers for the ready supply of manuscripts, etc.; to 
Mr. Sanial of the Calcutta Historical Society ; to Sir Michael Sadler, to 
whom I am indebted for advice and for the valuable suggestion of a 



Preface 



.1 

vu 



statement ol contemporaneous events and to Mr. Ruskbrook- 
Williams for the checking of that statement and perusal of the work 
in manuscrij)t. 

H. SHARP, 

Educational Commissioner with the 

Government of India. 

Simla ; 



The 25th October, 1919. 



CONTENTS. 



? Page 

* * * 

. * . . hi 



CHAPTER I. 
Early Enterprise. 

f document* 

1, Minute, dated tho 17th April 1781, hy Warren Hastings * 7 

2. Letter, dated the 1st January 1792, from J. Duncan, Resilient at BeUaroi . v 10 

3, Benares College- Rules (enclosure to No- 2) , , 1 1 

4. Letter, dated tho 13th January 1792, from tho Governor in Council to tho Resident 

at Benares 12 

6. Letter, dated tho 25th September 1823, from W. Praser (Delhi), to Government 13 



CHAPTER II. 

Tnr Growto of a Sense of Responsibility. 

6. Extracts from a minute, dated tho 6th March 1811, hy Lord Minto 

7. Section 43 of tho East India Act of 1813 

8. Extract from despatch to Bengal, dated tho 3rd June 1814 * 

9. Extract from a minute, dated tho 2nd October 1815, hy Lord Afoim 
10. An account of expenditure on education for tho years 1813 to 1830 

CHAPTER HI. 
Institutions 

1L Minuto, dated tho 1st January 1804, by T. Brooke, President, Hindu College, 

Benares 33 

12. Accounts of tho Calcutta Madras**a, 3rd October 1823 y 30 

13. Extract from tho report of tho Select Committee, dated tho 10th AugUBt 1832 (un 

the College of Port William and the East India College, Haileybury) . . 38 

14. Report, dated tho 31st January 1835, on tho Sanskrit College, Calcutt x 39 

CHAPTER IV. 

Mass Education and Organisation, 

15. Resolution, dated tho 17th July 1823, constituting the General Committee of 



Public Instruction G3 

10. Letter, dated tho 31st July 1823, appointing members of tho General Committee 

of Public Instruction 5j 

17. Note, dated 17th July 1823, by HoltMncfconzio 57 

18. Extract from a letter, dated tho I7th August 1823, from A. D. Campbell, Collector . 

of Bcllary * 05 

( ) 



*-+»• 

Preface 



19 

on 

24 
29 



X 



Contents 



CHAPTER IV— tontd. 

Mass Education and Organisation — conid. 
Document. p A or. 

19. Letter, dated September 1823, from the Comtnittco to Local Agcnt« 69 

20. Resolution, dated the 17th January 1824, on the allotment of funda 71 

21. Minute, dated the 10th March 1826, by Sir Thomas Munro 73 

CHAPTER V. 

The Beginning or English Education. 

22. Extract from C. Grant's Observations, dated the 10th August 1797 . . . 81 

23. Letter, dated the Cth October 1823, from the General Committee of Public 

Instruction 80 

24. Extract from a despatch, dated tho ISth February 1824, to Bengal . . . 91 

25. Letter, dated the 18th August 1824, from tht> General Committee of Public 

Instruction 93 

2G. Address, dated tho 11th December 1823, from RajaRammohun Roy 98 

CHAPTER VI. 
Maoaulay's Minute. 

27. Extract from a minuto, dated tho 9th July 1831, by H. T. Prinsop . • .103 

28. Extract from a letter, dated tho 21et January 1835, from tho Gono~al Committeo 

of rublio Instruction IW 

29. Extract from a letter, dated tho 22nd January 1835, from the General Committeo 

of Public Instruction ........... 105 

30. Minuto, dated tho 2nd February 1835, by T. B. Macautay . . . . 107 

31. Note, dated the 15th Fcbniary 1835, by % H. T. Prinsop with marginal notes by 

T. B, Macaulay . . . 117 

32. Resolution, dated tho 7th March 1835 130 

* 

CHAPTER VII. 

The Orientalists' Point of View. 

33. Extract from tho Diary of H. T. Prinsop . . . . . . . .132 

34. Minuto, dated tho 20th May 1835, by II. T. Prinsep 134 

36. Lottcr, dated tho 20th April 1835, from tho General Committeo of Publio 

Instruction . . . . ... . . • • • * * 139 

36. Propositions by tho General Committeo of Public Instruction adopted "on tho 11th 

April 1835 142 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Lord Auckland's Minute, 

37. Extract from minuto of 1828 by Sir J. Malcolm, Governor of Bombay ♦ ■ 144 

38. Petition of the students of the Sanskrit College, Calcutta, dated tho 9th August 1SL0 145 



Contents 



CHAPTER VIII— 
Lord Auckland's tfitfUT^_ con f ( f a 

Document, 

39. Minute, dated the 21th August 1S3G, by Lord Au c ki am i 

40. Minute, dated tho 24th November 1839, by Lord Auckland „ 

41. Extract from a note, dated tho 2ith November 1 839, by J. R. Colv 



APPENDICES. 

A. — Analysis of Fishcr'a Memoir ...... 

B. — Chronological list of documents % 

C. — Leading events in India and Europo from 1781 to 1^39 . 

I *i D E3C 



-Selections from Educational Records 



CHAPTER L 

Early Enterprise. 

" Education is no exotic in India. There is no country where 
the love of learning had so early an origin or has exercised so lasting and 
powerful an influence. From the simple poets of the Vedic age to the 
Bengali philosopher of the present day there has been an uninterrupted 
succession of teachers and scholars. The immense literature which 
this long period lias produced is thoroughly penetrated with the 
scholastic spirit : and the same spirit has left a deep impression on 
the social conditions of the people among whom that literature was 
produced."** 

In the laws of Manu and other Dharma Sastras, there is inforina- 
lion about the regulations of the studies of the upper classes, particularly 
the Brahmans, but there is no record of any instruction for the lower 
classes; and even with reference to the "twice born" there is little 
indication of the extension of education. Famous seats of learning 
were Taxila — at the beginning of the Christian era, Ujjain in the early 
centuries of that era, Ayodhia, Nalanda and Pataliputra (Patna) during 
the Gupta period, and Benares; and later on Sringeri in Mysore 
and Nadia in Bengal. Taxila, Nalanda and Pataliputra were Bhuddist 
centres. Pii-IIion describes briefly the monasteries at Pataliputra, 
Hiuen Tsiang and I-Tsing that at Nalanda ; etc. 



*l T. W. Thomas, The History and 1'rospccte of British tiducalion in India. 1\ I. 



2 Selections from Educational Records 

Whatever may liave been llie effect of the Muslim conquest of 
India on education, the Ernperor Akbar took considerable interest in 
the subject, as the following interesting passage from the Ain-i- 
Akbari* shows: — 

" In every country, but especially in Hindustan, boys arc kept for years at 
ecliool, where they learn the consonants and vowels. A great portion of the life 
of tho students is wasted by making tlicra read many books. His Majesty orders 
that every school boy should first learn to write the letters of tho Alphabet, and 
also learn to trace their several forms. He ought to Icarn the shape and name 
of each letter, which may be done in two days, when the boy should proceed 
to write tho joined letters.* They may be practised for a week, after which the 
boy should Icarn some prose and poetry by heart, and then commit to memory some 
verses to tho praise of God, or moral sentences, each written separately. Care is 
to bo taken that ho learns to understand everything himself ; but the teacher 
may assist him a little. He ought then for some time to be daily practised in 
writing a hemistich or a verse, and will soon acquire a current hand. The 
teacher ought especially to look after five things : knowledge of the letters ; 
meanings of words ; the hemistich ; the verse ; the former lesson. If this 
method of teaching be adopted, a boy will Icarn in a month, or even in a day, 
what it took others years to understand, so much so that people will be quite 
astonished. Every boy ought to read books on morals, arithmetic, the notation 
peculiar to arithmetic, agriculture, mensuration, geometry, astronomy, 
physiognomy, household matters, tho rules of Government, medicine, logic, 
the* tabi'i, riyazi, and ilahl sciences, and history ; all of which may be gradually 
acquired. 

In studying Sanscrit, students ought to learn the Bayakaran, Niyai, Bcdanfa, 
and Patanjal. No one should be allowed to neglect those things which tho 
present time requires. 

These regulations shed a new light on schools, and cast a bright lustre 
over Madrasahs." ~ 

" Education in India under the British Government," says Howell, 
" was first ignored, then violently and successfully opposed, then con- 
ducted on a system now universally admitted to be erroneous and 
• finally placed on its present footing."! The East India Company 
was not specially interested in education. There was no State s} T stem 

- — -— — — — - - - — — - ■ ■ ■ |||— ~ 1 ■ 1 — l 

* Pp. 278-279. Ed. Blochinann. Tho spelling and diacritical marks arc taken from tho lost 
quoted. 

t Education in British India, by Aiixuua HowrtiL, Esq*, Calcutta, 1872, 



4 



1 



Earhj Enterprise 3 

of education in England, and interference by -the State was resented. 
India had her own places of education. There were scats of Sanskrit 
and Arabic learning. There were indigenous schools reported to 
number 12.4AS in the Madras Presidency in 1822, and estimated at 
lOfl.000 in Bengal in 18:15. Fishers Memoir (1S27) shows 18S,G50 
pupils under instruction out of a population of 12,850,941 in 
districts in Madras, or 1 in G7. The paucity of pupils, the lack of 
facilities for educating girls and the primitive nature of the instruc- 
tion and discipline nre described by Mr, Adam, some of the results of 
whose enquiries are accessible in \\\oAhilnttta Review, Volume 11, 1844,* 
The system appears to have been insufficient and ineffective. But, 
if England could get on without a State organisation, there seemed 
little reason to introduce one in India; and the Company was at first 
a trading rather than a ruling corporation. 

The earliest efforts to introduce any form of education beyond 
the indigenous system emanated from missionaries, private societies 
and individuals, whether officials or others. 

In a despatch of 1059, the Court of Directors had declared their 
carne.-t desire by all possible means to propagate the Gospel. Mis- 
sionaries were allowed to embark on their ships. A missionary clause 
was embodied in the Charter of IGflS. The following extract front a 
Despatch of the Court of Directors, dated the IGth February 1787, is 
of interest as regards Madras, alluding as it does to the efforts of 
Swart z, whose name is still remembered as a pioneer of education in 
that Presidency. 

# # t!: * # 

The utility and importance of establishing a free and direct communica- 
tion with the Natives, having boon pcnsibly experienced during the late war 
in India, and their acquiring a knowledge of the English language being the 
moM> effectual means of accomplishing thin desirable object, it is with .great pleasure, 
we learn from Mr* John Sulivon, our late Resident at Tanjoro, that ho had, seconded 



* Thv remit* v. ore aim rnllr H wl itt Attain 0 Ittimttt on Vernacular Induration in Itcttgat and llihar ; 
fivhmtitol to {torrrnmnd in ]ft3fi, 1X3(1 nnd I SIB, 1W//1 a hrirf view 0/ iff jhia! tint] prrunl rendition, hy 
the Knv* J. I/Ko, Cfttcttttn, 1KG8. 



4 Selections from Edvcatioiial Records 

in his laudable undertaking by flic zealous exertions of the Rovd. Sir. Swartz, 
prevailed on the Rajah of Tanjorc, and the Rajahs of the great and little Marawar 
to establish schools for teaching English at Tanjorc, Ramcnedaporam and 
Shevagunga, the capitals of their respective countries, the two lat|er assigning 
Pagodas 300 (three hundred) each, for the support of their two seminaries* 
These works of peace Mr. Sulivan informs us have been interrupted by the 
calamities of War, and the funds assigned for their support necessarily diverted 
to other purposes, but we hope they will revive with the restoration of tranquillity. 

Highly approving of institutions calculated to establish mutual good 
faith ; to enlighten the minds of the Natives and to impress them with sentiments 
of esteem and respect for this British nation, by making them acquainted with the 
leading features of our Government so favourable to the rights and happiness of 
mankind; we have determined to evince our desire of promoting their success, by 
contributing 250 pagodas per annum towards the support of each of the schools 
above mentioned, and of any other school which may be opened for the same 
purpose, and w T o accordingly direct you to pay such schools, respectively the 
annual stipend of 250 pagodas, flattering ourselves that our example will excite 
the Native Princes in alliance with us to similar and more extensive benefactions* 

*!* *X* *t* *t" tJr 

«Ji »J» JjT *t* JJ» 

After the battle of Plnsscy and the assumption of wider powers 
by the Company, its officers began to view attempts at proselytisa- 
tion with alarm. When Carey, Marshman and AVard reached India 
towards the close of the eighteenth century, fearful of compulsory re* 
patriation, they settled in the little Danish colony of Serampore* 
Their zeal, out-running their discretion, brought them into trouble in 
1807 ; only the intervention of the Danish Government saved them 
from removal to surveillance in Calcutta ; and the Court of Directors 
issued a despatch, dated the 7th September 1808,* declaring strict 
religious neutrality and refusing to lend authority to any attempt 
to propagate the Christian religion. The following passages may be 
quoted : — 

sfc iV »t* *i* *t? ih 

»h *j* *;* *i» *f» 

We observe with great satisfaction the temperate and jespectful conduct of 
tlie society of Missionaries in the discussions which took place on the subject 

* Printed in J. W. Kaye*s Christianity in Jntlia ; an historical narrative, p. 6Kt. 



Early Enterprise 



5 



of the Publications to which your attention was directed and of the measures 
which you felt yourselves called upon to adopt, and we entirely approve of the 
permission which you granted to them of continuing their Press at Serampore. 
Their residence at that place would probably bo attended with little additional 
inconvenience to your Government, and we conclude moreover that the British 
Authority has long ago been established at the different Danish Settlements in 
India. We arc well aware that the progress of the Missionaries, both Catholic 
and Protestant, for a long period of years has not been attended with injurious 
consequences ; their numbers have not been sufficient to excite alarm and their 
general conduct has been prudent and conciliating, and we have no reason to 
suppose that the mere circulation, in a peaceable and unobtrusive manner ? of 
translations of the Scriptures is likely to be attended with consequences 
dangerous to the public safety. 

H *t* *f* «t» *1* \t+ »1» 

, *T- ' t * *7- **C Tfl 

i 

In adverting to your prohibition of the public preaching in Calcutta to the 
Hindoos and Mahomedans, at the time when we approve of this measure of pre- 
caution, we do not understand you to object to the Missionaries decently performing 
at ( their usual places of residence the duties of their Religion in Chapels or 
Rooms at which admittance may be given to their Converts or to other Christians. 
We presume that the number of Chaplains which we have appropriated for the 
performance of Religious duties at Calcutta is sufficient for all the British and 
other Inhabitants of that place who comprehend the English Language ; but we 
do not collect it to have been your intention to preclude other Christians there from 
hearing Divine Service performed in a Language which they understand. 

Having thus explained to you as briefly as possible the principles on which we 
wish you to act with regard to the Missionaries, it remains for us only to advert to 
your suggestion that we should " discourage any accession to the number of 
Missionaries actually employed under the protection of the British Government in 
India in the work of Conversion." You are of course aware that many of the 
meritorious Individuals who have devoted themselves to those labours were not 
British Subjects or living under our authority, and that none of the Missionaries 
have proceeded to India with our license. 

* ^ ft & =fc # 

In conveying to you our approbation of the control which you had determined 
to exercise with Tegard to such Publications as might issue from the Press of the 
Missionaries, we trust that it will be found not only salutary to the interests of 



6 Selections from Educational Records 

Government but even satisfactory to the considerate part of the Missionaries 
themselves. They must be aware that it is quite consistent with doing all justice 
to the excellency of the motives on which they act, to apprehend that th'eir 
zeal may sometimes require a check, and that it may be useful and necessary to 
introduce the control or superintendence of Government, whose responsibility for 
the public tranquillity will force it to direct its views to those political considera- 
tions which the zeal of the Missionaries might overlook. 

These passages are of interest, as giving an early instance of press- 
censorship and as stating the attitude of Government in regard to 
religion.* 

The British Government have never swerved from this position 
of neutrality. But education has come to be distinguished from 
proselytisation ; mission effort has received state support ; and a long 
list of honoured names testifies to the solid educational work which 
missionaries have accomplished in India. 

It is not necessary to dwell on the efforts of private societies. In 
1789, the Calcutta Free School Society was founded for the education 
of Europeans. Others, such as the Calcutta Benevolent Institution > 
were the outcome of missionary enterprise. 

Later came the Calcutta School Book Society, the Calcutta School 
Society, the Society for promoting the Education of the Poor within 
the Government of Bombay and the Bombay Native School Book and 
School Society. 

Among individuals there were Captain Doveton, General Claude 
Martin, David Hare and others. The growing interest of Indians them- 
selves was exemplified in Ram Molinn Boy and others. Officials, too, 
though this was no recognised part of their duties, founded institu- 

\ \ II r - ■ _ . . . -.T.J--J1_-1_ ■ . II ' ' ■IMB^ll ■■■■■■■■'I ■■WP W I1I ■■ I I 

* In 1822 Mr. Carey, son of Dr. Caroy, was reprimanded by Government for not adhering 
strictly to tho policy of neutrality. A 1 ot tor, datod Fort William, Gth July 1822, addressed to Sir D . 
Ochtcrlony, reads — " His Excellency tho Governor General in Council has perceived with rihich 
ro^rot the highly injudicious and objectionable course pursued by Mr. Caroy in introducing tho sacred 
boohs of Scripture as school books in institutions of so recent a date and in such a state of socioty as 
that of Rajpootanah. Mr* Caroy will receive injunctions through his father, tho Rovcrcnd Doctor 
Carey, to discontinue the use in schools undor his chargo of tho Christian Scriptures 'and all religion? 
tracts calculated to excite alarm as to our motives in the minds of the Natives." 



Early Enterprise 



* i 

7 



tions. In 17S1 Warren Hastings founded tlie Calcutta Madrassa, the 
main and special object of which was " to qualify the sons of Muham- 
madan gentlemen for responsible and lucrative offices in the State, 
even at that date largely monopolised by the Hindus."* The cost was 
at first privately defrayed by the Governor-General ; but after two 
years he was reimbursed and the institution was handed over to 
Government. In 1792, Jonathan Duncan, the Resident at Benares, 
founded the Benares Sanskrit College, which was maintained by Govern- 
ment. The Commissioner of the Deccan started a college for Hindu 
learning at Poona, utilising part of the fund established by the 
Peshwas for the support of Pandits.^ In the Delhi district Mr. Fraser 
founded schools for the instruction of " children of the zamindars 
or peasantry, in reading and writing the Persian language, at an 
expense to himself of about Us. 200 per mensem." 

Thus, though the Company had as yet assumed no responsibility 
for the education of the people, its individual officers here and 
there applied public funds to the maintenance of institutions of oriental 
learning. Two early documents are connected with these institutions. 
On the 17th April, 1781, the Governor-General issued a minute relative 
to the Calcutta Madrassa. In the Government order of the 13th 
January, 1792, Lord Cornwallis approved the proposal of the Resident 
at Benares for the foundation of the Benares Sanskrit College. 

The documents referred to are here reproduced together with 
the project put forward by the Resident at Benares, and Mr. Fraser's 
scheme. 

(1) Minute by the Governor 'General, Warren Hastings, dated the 17th 

Ayril 17 81.% 

In the month of September 1780 a petition was presented to mo by a consider- Minnie b?/ 
able number of Mussulmen of credit and learning, who attended in a body for that Warren Hastings t 

1781. 

* 

* Education in British India by Ahtiiuu IIowkll, p. 1. , 
t Another version says that the institution was charged to tho Company. Probably tho ox- 

planation is that tho Company had assumed inanagoinont of tho Dakshwi Fund. Soc Fisher's 

Memoir quoted in Appendix A, p. 198. A 
X Printed in lienyal: Past and Present, VIII, 1014, p. 105 f. 

C2 



8 Selections from Educational Records 

i 

Minute by purpose praying that I would use my influence with ar stranger of the name of 

Warren Hastings, Mudgicl O'din who was then lately arrived at the Presidency to persuade him to 
1781 — contd % remain there for the instruction of young students in the Mahomedan law, and 

in such other sciences as are taught in the Mahomedan schools for which he was 
represented to be uncommonly qualified* They represented that this was a 
favourable occasion to establish a Madressa or College, and Mudgid O'din the fittest 
person to form and preside in it, that Calcutta was already become the seat of a 
great empire, and the resort of persons from all parts of Hindoostan^ and Deccan, 
that it had been the pride of every polished court and the wisdom of every 
well regulated Government both in India and in Persia to promote by such 
institutions the growth and extention of liberal knowledge, that in India only 
the traces of them now remain, the decline of learning having accompanied that 
of the Mogul Empire, that the numerous offices of our Government which 
required men of improved abilities to fill and the care which had been occasionally 
observed to select men of the first eminence in the science of jurisprudence to 
officiate as judges in the criminal and assessors in the Civil Courts of Judicature, 
and (I hope this addition will not be imputed to me as ostentation on an ocfeasipn 
in which the sincerity of what I shall hereafter propose for the public patronage 
will be best evident by my own example) the belief which generally prevailed 
that men so accomplished usually met with a distinguished reception from myself 
[which] afforded them particular encouragement, to hope that a proposal of this 
nature would prove acceptable to the actual Government. 

This was the substance of the Petition which I can only repeat from my 
memoiy, having mislaid the original. 

I dismissed them with a promise of complying with their wishes to the 
utmost of my power. I sent for the man on whom they had bestowed such en- 
comiums and prevailed upon him to accept of the office designed for him. He 
opened his school about the beginning of October and has bestowed an unremitted 
attention on it to this time, with a success and reputation which have justified 
the expectation which has been formed of it. Many students have already 
finished their education under his instructions and have received their dismission 
in form and many dismissed unknown to me. The master supposing himself 
limited to a fixed monthly sum which would not admit a larger number besides 
day scholars, he has at this time forty boarders mostly natives of these Provinces, 
but some sojourners from other parts of India. Among them I had the satisfac- 
tion of seeing on the last new year's day, some who had come from the districts 
of Cashmeer, Guzarat, and one from the Carnatic. 

I am assured that the want of suitable accommodation alone prevents an 
increase of the number. For this reason I have lately made a purchase of a con- 
venient piece of ground near the Boita Connah in a quarter of the town called 



Mimttv htj ]Yarren llasthup 9 

t 

Podpokcr and haw laid tin* foundation of a Mptaro building for a madrissa con- Minute by 
Mructed on the plan of Mmiltr edifice** in other parts of India, Warren Hastings, 

Thus far J have prosecuted the undertaking: on my own means and with no — contcl. 
very liberal Mipplies I am now constrained to recommend it to the Rpank and 
through that channel to the Hou'lde Court of Directors for a more adequate and 
permanent endowment . 

My an estimate of the building which with a plan and elevation of it shall 
accompany thi-> minute the who!** co^t of it will be 51,000 Arcot Rupees, to which 
I ^linll beg leave to ndd the price of the ground being 0,280 Sa Rupee*. The 
amount of both i^ Arcot rupee* 57,715-2-1 K It shall bo my care to prevent 
an vxve^ of Mtm which I request may be placed to the Company*?* accounts, 
and a hmid allowed me for the amount and that I may be enabled by the sanc- 
tion of the lionrd to execute thi* work. 

I nm^t likewise pnqH*^ that a parcel of land may be as<igued for the growing 
charge of this foundation. 

Tin* pn\H«nt e>;jH*n^e U a^ follow.** ; — 

l\K 

Th*- lVtt ♦ y\or r tmm'.h * . 3tK) 

10 Sc1u>! ir. (tT'Tu 7 in (i |h r tn»mth , . * -22 

A r-^j* r # * * . 3 
IIdu't txm* UK) 



Tor au . 



Tin* day j^rholar- pay nothing In the proportion of the above expense an 
oMubli-duuenI of KH Solml.itv may la* c-uimated at 10 t 000 Rupees per month at 
tlu* utmost. I would rveommmd that the renl^ of one or more Mou^u or villages 
in tit*- neighbourhood ol the place be aligned for the monthly exponce of the 
propo^d Madre^ .1 and tltat it bi> referred to the Committee ol Revenue to provide 
and make th** endowment and to regulate the- mode of collection and payment, 
in Mich n manner tv> to fix and ascertain the amount and periods of both and pre- 
vent any future jibiiM^ of one or misapplication of the other. For the present 
an a-'ignrnfot *>f half the estimated Him will be nuflicient. 

(Sd.) WAR It EN HASTINGS. 

Kokt Wiluam ; 

ruirth April mi. 



Agreed, 35. WnmxKit. 



10 Selectionb from Educational Records 

t 

Minute by Ordered that the estimate enclosed in the above minute be entered after the 1 

Warren Hastings, Consultation. ' 
1781— conoid. 

Agreed to the Governor-General's request and ordered accordingly. 

Ordered that copies of the above minute and its enclosure together with the 
plan and elevation of the building therein mentioned be transmitted to the Hon'ble 
the Court of Directors by the ships under dispatch and the subject particularly 
recommended to them for the purposes set forth by the Governor-General 



(2) Letter from J. Duncan, Resident, Benares, No. 17, dated 1st January 
1792, to the Earl of Gornwallis, K.G., Governor-General in Council.* 

My Lokd, 

Benares College, Having in view to the surplus Revenue expected to be derived from the 

permanent settlement (as reported in my address of the 25th November 1789) and 
of the instructions thereon passed by your Lordship in Council in February last to 
transmit for the consideration of Government my sentiments regarding its appro- 
priation reflected frequently on the subject ; it appeared to me that a part of those 
funds could not be applied to more general advantage or with more local pro- 
priety than by the Institution of a Hindoo College or Academy for the preserva- 
tion and cultivation of the Laws, Literature and Religion of that nation, at this 
centre of their faith, and the common resort of all their tribes. 

Two important advantages seemed derivable from such an establishment, the 
first to the British name and nation iu its tendency towards endearing our 
Government to the native Hindoos ; by our exceeding in our attention towards 
them and their systems, the care shewn even by their own native princes ; for 
although learnings has ever been cultivated at Benares, in numerous private 
seminaries, yet no public Institution of the kind here proposed ever appears to 
have existed K to which may, in a considerable degree, be attributed the great 
difficulty of now collecting complete treatises (although such are well known to 
have existed) on the Hindoo religion, laws, arts, or sciences ; a defect and loss, 
which the permanency of a college at Benares must be peculiarly well adapted to 
correct, and recover by a gradual collection and correction of the books still to be 
met (though in a very dispersed and imperfect state) so as with care and atten- 
tion and by the assistance and exertions of the possessors and students to 



* Printed in Bengal : Past and Present, VIII, 1914, pp. 130-133 ; and in G. Nxcholls* Sketch of 
the Rise, and Progress of the Benares Patshalla or Sanskrit College* Allahabad, 1907, p. 1 f. 



Selections from Educational Records 



Benares College, 7. The Brahmin teachers to have a preference over strangers in succeeding 
1/92 — contd. to the headship and the students in succeeding to professorships, if they shall on 

examination be found qualified. 

8. The scholars to be ^examined four times a year in the presence of the 
Resident in all such parts of knowledge as are not held too sacred to be discussed 
in the presence of any but Brahmins. 

9. Each professor to compose annually a lecture for the use of his students, 
on his respective science ; and copies of such lectures as may legally be divulged 
to be delivered to the Resident. 

10. Examinations of the Students, in the more secret branches of learning, 
to be made four times a year by a committee of Brahmins nominated by the 
Resident. 

11. The plan of a course of study in each Science to be prepared by the several 
professors. 

12. The students to be sometimes employed in transcribing or correct- 
ing books for the use of the College, so as to form in time a perfect library. 

13. The discipline of the College to be conformable in all respects to the 
Dharma Sastra in the Chapter on education. The second book of Monu contains 
the whole system of discipline, 

(4) Letter, dated the 13th January 1792, from the Governor in Council 

to the Resident at Benares, J. Duncan, Esq.* 

Sir, y 

"We have received your letter of the 1st instant with its enclosure. 
We entirely approve of the plan of the Hindoo College which you have 
established from the commencement of 1199 Fussly and concur in your sentiments 
respecting the public benefit that may be expected to result from it ; you will limit 
the expence of the establishment for the current year to Sicca Rupees 14,000 and 
in the event of the surplus collection not proving adequate to the payment of the 
amount you have our sanction to issue the deficiency from your Treasury. If in 
consequence of the unfavourableness of the past season there should be no surplus 
collections 3 T ou will charge the whole expence to the account of Government. 
From the commencement of the Fussly year 1200 we authorize you to 
increase the establishment to Sicca Rupees 20,000 per annum, provided upon the 
arrival of that period you shall be of opinion (of which you will advise us) that the 

♦ printed in Bengal * Pa*t and Present, VIII, 1014, pp. 137-135- 



Benares College Rides 



13 



surplus collections will be adequate to the payment of the amount, otherwise you Benares College, 
wiU restrict the expence. to the sum authorized to be disbursed in the current 1792 — concld. 
year. * " ' 

(5) Letter, dated 25th September 1823, from TP. Fraser to the Chief 

Secretary, Fort William. 

To 

W. B, Bayle\% Esq., Chief Secretary to Government in the Judicial 
Department, Fort William, 

Sir, 

It would be extremely ridiculous in me to sit down to write to the Letter horn W. 
Government or to you a sentence even upon the benefit of teaching the children of Fraser, 25ih 
the Peasantry of this country to read and write. I shall merely observe that the Sept. 1823. 
greatest difficulty this Government suffers, in its endeavours to govern Veil, 
springs from the immorality and ignorance of the mass of the people, their dis- 
regard of knowledge not connected with agriculture and cattle and particularly 
their ignorance of the spirit, principles and system of the British Government* 

2. It was long ago evident-to me that to commence a plan which might 
in time extend to a general arrangement for the instruction of a portion of the 
children of the Peasantry, or as would be commonly called the zamindars, to imbue 
them witb the elements of knowledge, which would excite ^a spirit for learning 
and information, was the only way of laying the foundation for the advancement 
ottbe people in moral conduct. 

3. To this end, so far back as 1814, I began with the instruction of 15 boys 
of the peasantry in reading and writing the Persian character and language. In 
1816 two schools of 20 bovs each were established. In 1820 a third, and in this 
year a 'fourth, has been set on foot. The schools are intended exclusively for the 
children of the peasantry or zamindars, and the main object in view is that the 
boys should understand from being able to read and write, something of the 
British Judicial and Revenue system to.the purpose of a diffusion of informa- 
tion amongst the mass, with which the individuals are identified. 

4. I wished to extend the plan to the instruction of so many boys in a 
hundred, in the English, the Persian and the Hindee languages, but my means are 
totally inadequate to the end. It might be difficult to procure teachers of the 
English language, teachers of the Persian and Hindee languages are always to be 
foun<L 

5. The establishment of schools in cities and towns is 'comparatively speaking 
of secondary consideration— the majority of children of classes that inhabit cities 

D 



\ 



14 Selections from Edttcational Records 

Letter from W. and towns are educated by their parents. It is the children of zamindars, of 
Fra$er,25lh Sept. the peasantry, of men enjoying hereditary and paternal lands in their own right, 
1823— con td. the mass of the people ; thousands to one of the people that require this Instruc- 
tion and will benefit by it. 

6. At present the number of boys I have under instruction is 80 and the num- 
ber of masters four. For the system prevalent at home originating in this country 
is adopted by a particular class of instructors only, few of the Mohomadan 
teachers understand it, I find that one master manages with advantage 20 
or 25 village boys. The master is allowed a rupee a month for each boy and each 
boy is allowed a seer of wheat flour a day. Without this ration the parents would 
not send their children to be taught for the boy's labour is lost to the family 
and the idle hand is not willingly supported by the rest, although in future it 
may be a means of raising the family affluence. In fact the schools are kept up 
by bribing both masters and boys, the former with the allowance of a rupee a 
month per boy and the latter with food. The head men would generally send 
their boys without receiving the daily ration, but as others receive it, they 
too think it as well to require it. 

7. My object now is to draw the attention of Government to this institu- 
tion, to the many obvious benefits which must arise from its extensions and 
encouragement, and 'to solicit for it the patronage of Government. I find 
that the monthly expense about 200 Rupees is too heavy for me to support 
and that it is out of the question to go on with the plan as a private undertaking. 
I seek therefore a provision by Government for these four, schools already 
established and reimbursement for the sums which have been laid out upon them. 
I propose too that a general measure should be authorised for preparing a 
sufficient number of boys out of the peasantry to receive instruction in the primary 
branches of ed^ation by teaching them to read and write the Persian and 
Hindee and if possible the English language. For instance, by a Census for the 
Western Division there is, we find, a population of 2,19,929 contained in 47,018 
houses or families. In this population there are 38,115 boys below 14 years -of 
age or about 19,053 below 7 years of age. But the class I allude to, the land- 
owning peasantry, the zamindars as they are called, is rated at 1,20,026 souls 
— although (there-are) many other cultivators — so that the boys for education may 
be estimated at about 10,000, and, if one in twenty-five or one in ten or twelve 
families be taught to read and write, that is, four in a hundred or forty in a 
thousand, four hundred boys would be fitted to acquire a knowledge of our 
principles of Government .and our system, and to impart this knowledge by actual 
contact with two hundred and twenty thousand souls. The expense of this * 
institution as it must be begun, would be Es. 175 for a hundred boys a month, 

or seven hundred rupees a month for four, hundred boys or Rs. 8,400 ev year, 'but 



Letter from W. Prasef 



15 



if it Tvete possible to supply masters capable of teaching on the Lancastrian Letter jrom 
principle the expenses would be much less. ~ Fraser, 25th 

8. If Government will give any consideration to my proposal I can pledge 1823— cond 
myself to carry it into execution and that it be acknowledged by the people as 
the greatest benefit Government could confer upon them. At all events I request 
you will obtain the orders of Government relative to the 80 boys now under 
tuition, the monthly expense of their support and schooling, and the money 
already laid out upon them. If Government adopt the schools, I will forward to 
you the original accounts from first to last and a descriptive list of the boys 
noting the degree of proficiency of each.* 

I have, etc., 

W. FRASER, 2nd Member. 

Boaud op Revenue, Delhi District ; 
Gamp Binjhoul, 25th September 1823. 



* The General Committee of Public Instruction in a letter to Government, dated 29th November 
1S23, animadverted upon Mr, Fraser 1 s proposal, and based their refusal of support upon the fact that 
the answer of the Local Agents at Delhi to their circular letter of the previous August had not been 
received," upon the expense as compared with the Chinsurah scale of cost, and upon the principle 
that it was 14 expedient that the appropriation of any limited funds assigned for the purpose of public 
education should bo chiefly directed to the best means of improving the education of the more res- 
pectable members of Indian society, especially those who make letters their profession." 



CHAPTER II 



The growth of a sense op responsibility. 

Despite the efforts of individual officers, the East India Company 
had not yet come to regard the promotion of education as part of 
its duty and there was much opposition to the establishment of any 
system of instruction. Gradually the idea began to dawn that some 
responsibility lay upon that body. This view found expression Jboth 
in England and in India. - 

Charles Grant, a servant of the Company in India, afterwards a 
Director and a member of Parliament, was one of the leaders of the 
Clapham sect and a friend of Wilberforce, the philanthropist. In 1792, 
Grant wrote a treatise entitled " Observations on the state of Society 
-among the Asiatic Subjects of Great Britain, particularly with respect 
to Morals ; and on the means of Improving it."* He submitted his 
treatise to his colleagues on the Court of Directors in 1797. The docu- 
ment begins by assuming that all parties will concur in the sentiment 
that we ought to study the happiness of the vast body of subjects 
which we have acquired in India. Then follows a picture of " the 
people of Hindoostan " and in particular of " the Bengalese," which 
leads one to suspect that ^tlris well-wisher of India felt himself 
concerned at any cost to make out, even at the risk of exaggeration, a 
strong case for reform and was influenced by the arguments used by 
the obstructionists that the necessity for it *was lacking. 

Grant declared the cause of this condition of things to be ignor- 
ance and its remedy to be educatipn. He raised the question as to * 
whether the medium of instruction should be the vernacular or English, 



Report from the Committee of the House of Commons on the affairs of the East India Company. 
16th Augiist 1832. General Appendix 1 ; pp. 3 to 80. 

( 16 ) 



Growth of sense of responsibility 17 

While he admitted certain advantages in the use of the vernaculars 
and the possibility of their employment as a medium of instruction, 
he declared strongly in favour of the English language as the vehicle 
for imparting western ideas or as^he called them " our superior lights/' 
Thus he anticipated Macaulay, But at the same time he went far 
beyond him in proposing the diffusion of English over the country, 
the apparent supersession of vernaculars by that language and the 
imparting of the knowledge of Christianity. He also laid stress 
upon the importance of science and instruction in mechanics as 
applied to agriculture and other useful arts and the improvement of 
the methods of agriculture, etc. His views upon this subject. s are 
embodied in Chapter V. 

When the question arose of the renewal of the Company's Charter 
in 1792-93, Wiiberforce, instigated by Grant, pleaded for the despatch 
of schoolmasters to India, and carried a resolution in Parliament to 
the effect t{ that it is the peculiar and bounden duty of the British * 
Legislature to promote by all just and prudent means the interest 
and happiness of the inhabitants of the British dominions in India ; 
and that for these ends such measures ought to be adopted as may 
gradually tend to their advancement in useful knowledge and 
to their religious and moral improvement. "* 

He proposed to introduce into the bill a specific measure for the 
encouragement of missionaries and schoolmasters to be sent out from 
England. But the opposite party in the Court of Directors urged 
" that the Hindus had as good a system of faith and of morals as 
most people and that it would be madness to attempt their conversion 
or to give them any more learning or any other description of 
learning than what they already possessed/' The Government was 
unable to press Wilberforce's clause. 

Meantime on the Oth March, 1811, the Governor-General, Lord 
Minto, wrote a minute on the subject of education in India, the chief 
theme of which is the lamentable decay of learning. It is repro- 
duced at the end of this Chapter. 

p ^| i ■ M urn " .I I - i- m m i l l mn , ■ >. ni« » ly , i — m i u — n il ■ I , f m, — n I ^ j—^jj^jj*— t 1 — ■ - u I m — f — 1 I ■» -m* I" ■ I- ■ 

* Education in firitish India, by Anraun Uo\vr:u, # p< 3, Boo aIuo Calcutta Jtevhw, III, 18-15, p. 222f» 



18 Selections from Educational Records 

Twenty years after the first attempt of Grant nnrl AVilbcr- 
force to convince the Court of Directors of a sense of their responsi- 
bilities, the Charier of the Company came up once again for renewal." 
In the interim, there had been a change of feeling. Although the 
evidence tendered before the Committee of the House appointed for 
considering this subject was still strongly opposed to educational or 
missionary efforts in India, nevertheless "Wilberforce again succeeded 
in carrying his resolution. The result was the insertion in the East 
India Company Act of 1S13 (53, Geo. 3, C, 155} of a clause num- 
bered 43, which is justly famous as containing the first legislative 
admission of the right of education in India to participate in the 
public revenues. The section as it originally stood indicated that 
persons desirous of going to and remaining in India for purposes of 
introducing useful knowledge and religious and moral improvement 
should apply for permission to the Court of Directors who should 
either grant it or in the event of refusal transmit the application to 
the Board of Control who might finally dispose of it. Protection was 
to be afforded to such persons on arrival in India. The most im- 
portant part of the section is reproduced at the end of this Chapter, 
and enables the Governor-General in Council to direct the appli- 
cation to education of an jinnual sum not less than one lakh of 
rupees. 

" In some years/' says the Rcpjort on the affairs of the East 
India Company, 1832, " less than that has been expended, but in others 
twice or even five times the stipulated amount." Indeed, the resolu- 
tion of the Governor-General reproduced as document No. 20 in 
Chapter IV shows that it was not till 1823 that the grant was appro- 
priated for its proper use. 

But regular expenditure had been incurred some years before 
the first educational grant figured in the British estimates; and an 
account has been preserved (document No. 10), which shows the expen- 
diture from 1813 to 1830 and includes the proceeds both of the 
grant and of previous allocations. The effect of the new policy is 
clearly visible in the figures for 1824. 



* 

Growth of sense of responsibility 19 



In 1814 the Court of Directors issued their first educational 
despatch. Portions of it related to the disposal of the sum provided 
by the Act of 1813. It is reproduced as document No. 8. 

Finalty, Lord Moira's minute of 1815 (document Nof 9) may 
suitably be printed t as another extract in this chapter. He discusses 
the pressing need for education and the best means of utilising the 
public money thereon. 

(G) Extracts from a minnte, dated the 6th March 1811 9 by Lord Minto.* 

It is a common remark that science and literature are in a progressive state Minnie by Lord 
of decay among the natives of India. From every inquiry which I have been Minto, 1811. 
enabled to make on this interesting subject that remark appears to me but too 
well founded. The number of the learned is not only diminished but the circle of 
learning even among those who still devote themselves to it appears to be 
considerably contracted. The abstract sciences arc abandoned, polite literature 
neglected and no branch of learning cultivated but what is connected with the 
peculiar religious doctrines of the people. The immediate consequence of this 
state of things is the disuse and oven actual loss of many valuable books ; and it is 
to" bo apprehended that unless Government interpose with a fostering hand the 
revival of letters may shortly become hopeless from a want of books or of persons 
capable of explaining them. 

% * sf: * * * :!: 

Little doubt can bo entertained that the prevalence of the crimes of perjury 
and forgery so frequently noticed in the oflicial reports is in a great measure 
ascribablc both in the Mahomcdans and Hindoos to the want of due instruction 
in the moral and religious tenets of their respective faiths. It has beon even 
suggested and apparently not without foundation that to this uncultivated state 
of the minds of the natives is in a great degree to be ascribed the prevalence of 
those crimes which wore recently so great a scourge to the country. 

# # * tfc if; * * * 

Sufficient, I presume, has been already said to show the fitness of incurring 
*■ Fome additional expense with a view to the restoration of learning in the 
extensive provinces subject to the immediate government of this presidency. I 



* Evidence of 1832, App. No. 3 [325/486]. (A T ote— For tho full title ol this work and the inodo 
of referencing fico pp* 181 and 182.) 



* 



20 Selections from Educational Records 



Minnfe by Lo*d say a additional " because some r expense is already incurred for the maintenance 
Minto, 1811 — of students at Nuddea and a liberal sum is allowed for the support of the 
contd. Hindu College on an extensive scale at Benares, In the former case, however, 

the expense allowed is quite insufficient for the ends proposed and in the latter 
the institution requires to be remodelled in order to adapt it to the prevailing 
opinions and habits of the natives and to correct the abuses which have crept into 
it. The following points appear particularly to demand attention in revising the 
rules established for the government of the college of Benares. 

1st. A prejudice appears to exist among the Hindoos at that city against 
the office of professor considered as an office or even as a service ; and the most 
learned pundits have consequently invariably refused the situation although the 
salary attached to it is liberal, 

2nd, The feuds which have arisen among the members of the college and 
which may be ascribed chiefly to the avarice and malversation of the former 
native rector, entrusted with authority over the rest and with the payment of 
their allowances, have tended materially to defeat the objects of the institution. 

3rd, That part of the plan which supposes the attendance of teachers and 
pupils in a public hall appears to be inconsistent with the usages of the Hindoos. 
It has not only never taken effect but has tended to prevent the professors from 
giving instruction in their own houses, 

* * ^ * * # * * 



I would accordingly recommend that in addition to the college at Benares 
(to be subjected of course to the reform already noticed) colleges be established 
at Nuddea and at Bhour near Bhower in the district of Tirhoot. 

The following are the principal rules which I would propose should be 
established for the superintendence and management of those institutions includ- 
ing that already existing at the city of Benares : 

That the general superintendence of the colleges be vested at Benares in 
the agent to the Governor-General, the magistrate of the city and collector of 
the province ; at Nuddea in the^ senior member of the Board of Revenue and 
the magistrate and collector of that district ; at Tirhoot in the senior judge of the 
provincial court for the division of Patna and the magistrate and collector of 
that district and that such other persons be associated with* those officers as 
Government may at any time deem it advisable to appoint. 

2nd, That pensions be granted under the appellation of mtka birt to distin- 
guished teachers on condition that they deliver instructions to pupils at their 
own houses. 




Minute by Lord Minto 



21 



3rd, That the pensions to the teachers be paid by the collectors tinder the Minute by Lord 
general Regulations respecting pensions. Mmlo, 1811 — 

4th. That the teachers loe nominated by the different committees subject to concld. 
the approval or rejection of the Governor-General in Council. 

5tlu That a public library be attached to each of the colleges under the 
charge of a learned native with a small establishment of servants for the care of 
the manuscripts. 

Gth. That the librarians be appointed and remunerated in the mode prescribed 
with respect to the teachers, 

7th, That ready access be afforded both, to the teachers and the students 
and likewise to strangers, under such restrictions as the public convenience may 
require, for the purpose of consulting, transcribing the books, or making extracts 
from them. 

8th. That the duty of procuring books either by purchase or transcription be 
entrusted to the librarian \mder the control and orders of the committee. 

9th. That public disputations be held annually before the committees, and in the 
presence of all other persons who may be desirous of attending and that prizes, 
rewards and literary honours be conferred on such of the students as shall have 
manifested the greatest proficiency, 

* # * # 5j: sj: ^ 

With the difference only in the population of Hindoos and Mahomedans all 
the arguments which have been abovo stated in support of the arrangements 
proposed to be adopted for the propagation of knowledge among the former would 
equally apply to similar institutions for the benefit of the Mahomedans, A 

I sentiment of deference however for the Honourable Court of Directors restrains 
me from recommending any extension of the plan until their orders shall have 
been received on the subject generally of the Minute. I deem it therefore 

% sufficient to add on tho present occasion that Mahomedan colleges might be 
beneficially established at Bhaugulpore, Jaunpore (where Persian and Arabic 
literature formerly flourished) and at some places in the Ceded and Conquered Pro- 
vinces ; and that it might be advisable to reform the Madripsa or Mahomedan 
collegiate institution at Calcutta, on the principles recommended with respect 
to the Hindoo colleges. The attention of tho Honourable Court will be of 
course drawn to this interesting subject in the next despatch from tho Revenue 
Department, 

(Signed) MINTO, 

T. LUMSDEN, 

C. IIEWETT, 

II. T. COLEBEOOKK, 



22 Selections from Educational Records 

(7) East India Company Act of 1813, section 43.* 

Act of 1813* It shall be lawful for the Governor- General in Council to direct that out 

of any surplus which may remain of the rents, revenues, and profits arising from 
the said territorial acquisitions, after defraying the expenses of the military, 
civilj and, commercial establishments and paying tho interest of the debt, in 
manner hereinafter provided, a sum of not less than one lac of rupees in each 
year shall be set apart and applied to the revival and improvement of literature 
and the encouragement of the learned natives of India, and for the introduction and 
promotion of a knowledge of the sciences among the inhabitants of the British 
territories in India ; and thatf any schools, public lectures, or other institutions, 
for the purposes aforesaid, which shall be founded at the presidencies of Fort 
William, Fort St. George, or Bombay, or in any other part of the British terri- 
tories in India, in virtue of this Act shall be governed by such regulations as may 
from time to time be made by the said Governor-General in Council ; subject 
nevertheless to such powers as are herein vested in the said board of Commis- 
sioners for the affairs of India, respecting colleges and seminaries : Provided 
always, that all appointments to offices in .such schools, lectureships and other 
institutions, shall be made by or under the authority of the Governments within 
which the same shall be situated. 

(8) Extract of letter, in the Public Department, from the Court of Direc- 
tors to the Governor-General in Council of Bengal, dated 3rd June 

18144 

# $t ij: ^ $t 

Despatch of j 12. The Clause presents two distinct propositions for consideration ; first, the ' 
1814. encouiagement of the learned natives of India, and the revival and improvement 

of literature ; secondly, the promotion of a knowledge of the sciences amongst the 
inhabitants of that country. " 

13. Neither of these objects is, we apprehend, to be obtained thmigh the 
medium of public colleges, if established under the rules, and upon a plan similar 
to those that have been founded at our universities, because the natives of 
caste and of reputation will not submit to the subordination and discipline of 
a college ; and we doubt whether it would bo practicable to devise any specific 
plan which would promise the successful accomplishment of the objects under 
consideration. 



* Collection of Statute* relating to I^xdi<t t vol. i, p. 110. 

t The word 1 that * wis repealed by Gl and 52 Victoria, Chapter 3 ( 

% Evidence of 1832 > App. /, No. 5 (320/480]. 



bespatch of l8ld 23 

14. We are inclined to think that the mode by which the learned Hindoos Despatch of 
might be disposed to concur with us in prosecuting those objects would be by our 1814 — contd. 
leaving them to the practice of an usage, long established amongst them, of 
giving instruction at their own houses, and by our encouraging them in the 
exercise and cultivation of their talents, by the stimulus of honorary marks of 
distinction, and in some instances by grants of pecuniary assistance* 

»!• »1» ■!# *l» «f* -J* »A» 

»J» »J* "}» rjw *fi «J» *<> *J> 

16. Deeply impressed with these sentiments, we desire that your attention 
may be directed in an especial manner to Benares, and that you call upon your 
public representatives there to report to you what ancient establishments are 
still existing for the diffusion of knowledge in that city ; what branches of science 
and literature are taught there ; by what means the professors and teachers are 
supported ; and in what .way their present establishments might be improved to 
most advantage. 

18. The influence of such communications could not fail to be strengthened 
by your causing 'it to be made known that it is in the contemplation of the 
British Government to introduce and establish amongst the natives & gradation 
of honorary distinction as the reward of merit, either by the public presentation 
of ornaments of dress, in conformity with the usage of the East, or by con- 
ferring titles, or by both, as may be deemed most grateful to the natives, who 
should be invited to communicate their ideas to you upon points so much 
connected with their feelings. 

19. We refer with particular satisfaction upon this occasion to that distin- 
guished feature of internal policy which prevails in some parts of India, and 
by which the instruction of the people is provided for by a certain charge upon 
the produce of the soil, and by other endowments in favour of the village teachers, 
who are thereby rendered public servants of the community. 

20. The mode of instruction that from time immemorial has been practised 
under these masters has received the highest tribute of praise by its adoption in 
this country, under the direction of the Reverend Dr. Bell, formerly chaplain at 
Madras,* and it is now become the mode by which education is conducted in our 
national establishments, from a conviction of the facility it afiords in the 
acquisition of language by simplifying the process of instruction. 

r|C 1^ Sft 



* Bell (1753—1803) was in Madras from 1789 to 1796. His system of 4 mutual instruction ' was 
tried in England for a short time. It was officially condemned in 1839 as a vicious system leading 
to disastrous re&ults ; and has been condemned by most educational authorities since* See Calcutta 
, Review, No. XXXIII, 1852, pp. 53— 9G. 

E 2 



> 



24 



Selections from Educational Records 



Despatch of 
1814—coiitd. 



22. We are informed that there are in the Sanskrit language many excellent 
systems of ethics, with codes of laws and compendiums of the duties relating to 
every class of the people, the study of which might be useful to those natives who 
may be destined for the Judicial Department of Government. There are also 
many tracts of merit we are told on the virtues of plants and drugs, and on the 
application of them in medicine, the knowledge of which might 'prove desirable to 
the European practitioner, and there are treatises on Astronomy and Mathematics, 
including Geometry aud Algebra, which, though they may not add new lights 
to European science, might be made to form links of communication between 
the natives and the gentlemen in our service, who are attached to the Observatory 
and to the department of engineers, and by such intercourse the natives might 
gradually be led to adopt the modern improvements in those and other sciences. 

23- With a view to these several objects we have determined that due 
encouragement should be given to such of our servants in any of those depart- 
ments as may be disposed to apply themselves to the study of the Sanskrit 
language, and we desire that the teachers who may be employed under your 
authority for this purpose, may be selected from those amongst the natives who 
may have made some proficiency in the sciences in question, and that their 
recompense sLotild be liberal. 



* 



* 



* 



25, When you have digested any plan calculated to promote the views to 
which your attention has been directed in the foregoing instructions, you will take 
the earliest opportunity of submitting it to us for our consideration, but you will 
not finally adopt any arrangement for carrying it into .execution until it shall 
have previously received our approbation and sanction. 



* 



We are 
Your affectionate Friends, 

W. F. ELPHINSTONE, etc, 



Minute by Lord 
Moira, 1815. 



(9) Extract from a minute by Lord Moira, on the Judicial adminis- 
tration of the Presidency of Fort William, dated the 2nd October 
1815. 

119. In looking for a remedy to these evils, the moral and intellectual 
improvement of the natives will necessarily form a prominent feature of any 
plan which may arise from the above suggestions, and I have therefore not failed 
to turn my most solicitous attention to the important object of public education. 

120, The liumble but valuable class of village schoolmasters, claims the first 
place in bins discussion. These inen teach the first rudiments of reading, writing * 



Minute by Lord Moira 25 , 

and arithmetic for a trifling stipend which is within reach of any man's means, Minute by Lord 
and the instruction which they are capable of imparting, sufliccs for the village Moira, 1815 — 
zeemcendar, the village accountant and the village shopkeeper. contd. 

121. As the public mono}' would bo ill-appropriated in merely providing 
gratuitous access to that quantum of education which is already attainable, 
any intervention of government cither by superintendence, or by contribution, 
should be directed to the improvement of existing tuition, and to the diffusion of 
it to places and persons now out of its reach. Improvement and diffusion may 
go hand in hand ; yet the latter is to be considered matter of calculation, while the 
former should be deemed positively incumbent, TJre general, the sad defect of 
this education is, that the inculcation of moral principle forms no part of it. This 
radical want is not imputable to us. The necessities of self- defence (for all our 
extensions of territory have been achieved in repelling efforts made for the sub- 
version of our power) and our occupation in securing the new possessions, have 
allowed us till lately, but little leisure to examine deliberately the state of the 
population which we had been gradually bringing beneath our sway. It was 
already vitiated. The unceasing wars which had harassed all parts of India, left 
everywhere their invariable effects, a disorganization of that frame-work of 
habit and opinion, which enforces moral conduct, and an emancipation of all 
those irregular impulses which revolt at its restraint. The village school-masters 
could not teach that in which they had themselves never been instructed ; 
and universal debasement of mind f the const ant concomitant of subjugation to 
despotic rule, left no chance that an innate sense of equity should in those 
confined circles suggest the recommendation of principles not thought worth)' of 
cultivation by the government- Tho remedy for this is to furnish the village 
school-masters with little manuals of religious sontimcnts and othic maxims, con- 
veyed in such a shape as may be attractive to the scholars ; taking care that while 
awe and adoration of the Supreme Being are earnestly instilled no jealousy bo 
excited by pointing out any particular Creed. Tho absence of such an objec- 
tion, and small pecuniary rewards for zeal occasionally administered by the 
magistrates, would induce tho school-mastors to use those compilations readily. 

122. To those who arc anxious to propngalo among the vast population of this 
empire the inestimable lights of true religion, it may bo confidently maintained 
that there is no hope of success but by rendering the people capable of understand- 
ing that which is proposed to them ; open the minds of tho rising generation by 
duo instruction ; give them a habit of reverencing the principles which tho Christian 
doctrine enjoins without stimulating tho parents into opposition by teaching on 
point adverse to their superstitions ; and their inevitable rejection of beliefs 
irreconcilable to the reason which you will have enabled them to exorcise, and repug- 
nant to the probity which you will have taught them to admiro, must render 



* 



1 



i 



\ 

t 



$6 Selections from Educational Becords 

i 

Minute by Lord certain their transition to the path you wish. As it is, their ignorance insures 
Moira, 1815 — their tenaciousness of their earlier impressions, and pledges their implicit submis- 
contd. sion to the dictates with which the Brahmins would counteract the object 

were they alarmed into contest. The progress to be effectual, must be patient 
and silent ; like every other beneficial change, it must rise out of the general 
sense of society, not be imposed upon it ; and to produce that sense, I know no 
mode but education, 

123. The next gradation in public tuition, is the higher class of teachers 
to be found in the principal towns, and the only question in regard to them 
appears to be the expediency of furnishing them with the means of inculcating 
more accurate ideas of general science and sounder principles of morality. 

124. In these towns will also be found the same medium scale of education 
for the class of shopkeepers, artificers and labourers as in the country villages, 
but in these towns, and principally in the chief station of the zillah, and in the 
neighbourhood of our jails will be found a numerous population, which seem to 
call for the particular attention of Government. I allude to the offspring of 
mendicants and vagrants, who nurtured in idleness and vice, are destined to 
recruit the ranks of the professional thieves infesting all great cities. Houses 
of industry for the education, reformation anji employment of these infant 
profligates, appear to be particularly needed. 

125. That the native governments were not inattentive to the important 
object of public education, is evinced by the numerous grants of rent-free land, 
and of pecuniary allowances, for the endowment of public seminaries and the 
education of particular descriptions of pupils. But in the general disregard of 
established institutions which appears to have marked the steps of the British 
Government hitherto, their appropriation has been lost sight of, and the funds 
have through an inattention been converted into private property by native 
individuals. 

126. In such of these institutions as yet remain, and in such of them as may 
be still recoverable to their original purposes, the point for our consideration will 
be the nature as well as the extent of the interference which it may be proper for 
Government to exercise, and the mode in which that interference should be 
applied for giving an improved direction to them. 

127. With this view I beg leave to propose that the several plans which 
may be or have been suggested for the improvement of education in this 
country should be referred to the consideration of committees to be formed at 
the stations of Dacca, Patna, Moorshedabad, Benares, Bareilly and Furruchabad, 
of the principal civil officers residing there, and that their opinions be 
afterwards submitted to the deliberate revision of the most experienced servants in 
the judicial and revenue departments at the presidency. 



■ 



Mimttc by Lord- Mcira _27 

128. In the meantime two experimental schools, one for Hindoos and ono Minute by Lord 
for Mahomcdans, might be established at each zillah station under the superin- Moira, 1815 — 
tendence of a committee, consisting of all the civil servants at the station, contd. 
including the surgeons, together with any resident gentlemen not in the service 

who might be willing to lend their assistance ; the expediency and the means of 
extending the plan beyond the suddcr stations, will form a part of the deliberation 
of the provincial committees to be submitted to the control committee at the 
presidency, 

129. The decay of religious endowments and public seminaries is noticed 
by several of the magistrates; and the decline of morality is stated to be a 
subject of reproach against us by all the natives whom birth or education has 
inspired with concern for the good order or well being of society. 

130. If the operative effect of the British administration has been, however 
unintentionally, to do away with the restraint which before existed on the evil 
passions, while the increase of wealth, and more general diffusion of it, arising 
from the solid principles of equal justice, have afforded additional temptation to 
their indulgence, the reflecting part of the community may probably be impressed 
with an erroneous idea, that vice, if not encouraged, is not sufficiently discoun- 
tenanced by the ruling power. 

131. It certainly does not appear to have been ever the intention of the 
laws enacted by the British government to lessen the obligation of religion, or to 
weaken the proper influence of the priesthood. But that such has been the result 
of the general system cannot be doubted. This result may be ascribed partly to 
the omission of a positive enactment in support of the existing institutions of 
the country, partly to a too strict adherence in the judicial officers to the letter, 
without adhering to the general spirit of the laws, and partly perhaps to an 
expansive tendency in the human mind which in a state of freedom imper- 
ceptibly seeks progressive improvement with an impulse, which nothing but an 
injudicious attempt to introduce it too rapidly is capable of checking. 

132. The immediate encouragement of the superior descriptions of science 
- by any bounty to the existing native colleges, appears to me a project altogether 

delusive. I do not believe that in those retreats there remain any embers capa- 
ble of being fanned into life. It is true, the form of tuition is kept up in them, 
but the ceremony is gone through by men who are (as far as I could learn) devoid 
of comprehension in the very branches which they profess to teach, I was 
particularly curious to assure myself of the state of learning in the university 
of Benares, the place where one should expect that ancient acquirements 
would l)e fo/uid in the best preservation. My incompetence to judge on the 
substance of the answers given by the young men examined before me, 
did not extend to the manner of their performance, which was such as inspired 

i 



28 



Selections from Educational Records 



Minute faj Lord the notion that every thing they said was wholly by rote. On following up 
Mtnra, 1815 — this suspicion I ascertained that I had guessed accurately. I remained satisfied 
contd. ^hat the students only got by heart certain formularies unexplained to them 

by professors incapable of expounding the spirit of the lessons. Of course, the 
instruction, unless where it chanced to fall on some mind uncommonly vigorous and 
acute, would have very limited effect in future application, and if it did happen 
to be bestowed on a genius able to unravel it, the rational calculation was, timt it 
would only render him more dexterous in those crooked practices which the 
depraved habitudes of the community would offer to his imitation, I thence 
conceive that the revival of the liberal sciences among the natives can only be 
effected by the previous education (beginning with the rudiments) which shall 
gradually give to individuals the power of observing the relations of different 
branches of learning with each other, of comprehending the right use of science 
in the business of life, and of directing their enlargement of thought to the 
promotion of those moral observances in which' rests the temporal con- 
venience of society as well as the sublimer duty of man. Then, but not till 
then, such records, or such traces of ancient lore as remain in the universities 
may be useful. Consequently to this opinion, I must think that the sum set apart 
by the Honorable Court for the advancement of science among the natives 
would be much more expediently applied in the improvement of schools, than 
in gifts to seminaries of higher degree. 

133. It is satisfactory to find that there are many natives of birth and educa- 
tion who still feel an anxiety for the improvement of the general morals. For it is 
through their agency that such a measure is most likely to succeed.- It is also 
pleasing to observe, from the accurate and lively picture which Mr. Portescue 
has drawn of the public feeling, that while many solid and essential benefits are 
acknowledged in the security of person and property, in the advancement of 
agriculture and of commerce and in the free enjoyment of wealth, most of the 
disadvantages enumerated, where they attach to the executive details of the 
laws are capable of easy correction, and where they spring from the habits and 
manners of the people themselves, may be expected to yield to the silent but entire 
operation of the measures now in contemplation. 

134. In the infancy of the British administration in this country, it was 
perhaps a matter of necessity to confine our legislation to the primary principle 
of justice. " Not that nice and delicate justice, the offspring of a refined 
humanity, but that coarse, though useful, virtue, the guardian of contracts and 
promises, whose guide is the square and the rule, and whose support is the 
gallows/ 5 

135. The lapse of half a century and the operation of that principle have 
produced a new state of society, which calls for a more enlarged and liberal 



Minute by Lord Moira 



29 



policy* The moral duties require encouragement and experiment. The arts which Minute by Lord 

adorn and embellish life, will follow in ordinary course. It is for the credit of Moira> 1815 — 

the British name, that this beneficial revolution should arise under British sway, conoid* 

To be the source of blessings to the immense population of India is an ambition 

worthy of our country- In proportion as we have found intellect neglected and 

sterile here, the obligation is the stronger on us to cultivate it. The field is 

noble : may we till it worthily ! 

(Sd.) MOIRA. 

On the River Ganges, 
The 2nd October 1815. 

(10) An account of all sums that have been applied to the purpose of 
education of the natives in India, from the year 1813 to the latest period 
to which the same can be made out, distinguishing the amount in 
each year.* 



Year. 


Bengal. 


Madras. 


I Bombay. 


Total. 




£ 


£ 


£ 




1813 


4,207 


480 


442 


5,129 


1814 


11,606 


480 


499 


12,585 


1815 


4,405 


480 


537 


5,422 


1816 


5,146 


480 


578 


6,204 


1817 


5,177 


480 


795 


6,452 


1818 


5,211 


480 


630 


6,321 


1819 


/ 7,191 


480 


1,270 


8,941 


1820 


5,807 


480 


1,401 


7,688 


1821 


6,882 


480 


594 


7,956 


1822 


9,081 


480 


594 


10,155 


1823 


6,134 


480 


594 


7,208 


1824 


19,970 


480 


1,434 


21,884 


1825 


57,122 


480 


8,961 


66,563 


1826 


. 21,623 


480 


5,309 


27,412 


1827 


30,077 


2,140 


13,096 


45,313 


1828 


22,797 


2,980 


10,064 


35,841 


1829 


24,663 


3,614 


9,799 


38,076 


1830 


28,748 


2,946 


12,636 


44,330 



JAMES C. MELYILL. 

* Evidence of 1SB2, App. I., No. 2 [325/483]. 



CHAPTER III. 
Institutions. 

Before considering the documents which bear upon the contest 
between the Orientalists and the Anglicists, it is necessary to go back 
for a 'moment and to examine the character and progress of the insti- 
tutions which Government had hitherto supported. The two most 
famous may be taken as examples ; and an early report is printed on a 
third, the Sanskrit College at Calcutta.. Mention is made of other 
institutions in Chapters I and V and Appendix A. 

The institution of the Calcutta Madrassa* was intended for the 
, encouragement of the study of Arabic and Persian and of the Muham- 
madan law with a view more especially to the production of 
officers for the courts of justice. The course included natural 
philosophy, theology, law, astronomy, geometry, arithmetic, logic, 
rhetoric, oratory and grammar — all according to Islamic culture. 
There were five teachers on pay ranging from Bs. 30 to Us. 400 a 
month ; and the students, arranged in five classes, received stipends 
from Rs. 6 to Rs. 15 according to the class in which they were 
enrolled. 

Lands of the estimated value of Rs. 29,000 a year had been 
assigned for the maintenance of the Calcutta Madrassa and made 
over to Muhamniad Moizuddin, who was called the Superior of 
the institution, and to his successors. In 1788 conplaints were 
made of misconduct and mismanagement on the part of the Superior 
and the action taken did not prevent the recurrence of similar com- 
plaints thereafter. In 1818 it was found necessary to appoint a 
European Secretary to reside on the spot and control the affairs of 



* See also pages 7 and 182 and the Htslory of the Calcutta Madras** in Bengal : Past and Present, 
J 914, Vol. Vni, p. S2f. * 

( 30 ) 



i 

Institutions 



31 



the Madrnssa. The courses were overhauled and in 1821 an annual 
examination was held for the first time. In 1823 the college was 
removed from its unsatisfactory surroundings to Hastings Place. 
The results achieved by the college continued to show improvements.* 

The Benares Hindu Sanskrit College had as its object the 
preservation and cultivation of the laws, literature and religion of the 
Hindoos.*' The establishment originally consisted of a head pandit or 
rector, eight professors, nine salaried students, a certain number of 
poor children who were instructed gratis and any who cared to pa) r 
for instruction. The course was theology, ritual, medicine, music, 
mechanic arts, grammar, prosody, sacred lexicography, mathematics, 
' metaphysics, logic, law, history, ethics, philosophy and poetry. The cost 
was Rs. 20,000 a year. A minute (document No. 11) exists mitten by 
Mr. Thomas Brooke, the second judge of the Court of Appeal at 
Benares, and placed by him in his capacity of acting president of 
the institution before the committee of management at a meeting of 
the 1st January 1804. He brought to the notice of the committee 
the disrepute into which the college had fallen. 

Among the reforms which Mr. Brooke considered necessary were the 
vesting of proper powers in the committee, the limitation of the 
branches of learning to be taught so that liberal salaries might be paid 
to the professors and the pensioning of all pandits when they became 
too infirm to perform their duties. The result of this representation 
was that Government sanctioned considerable reforms. In 1815 a 
European Superintendent was appointed, lie does not appear to have 
continued in that office ; for the resuscitation of the post was proposed 
in 1820 after it had been found that the college was doing very little 
good. Some improvement seems to have resulted and in January 
1821 we hear of an examination of the students at which " public 
disputations in grammar, logic, philosophy, metaphysics and law took 
place before all the European gentlemen of the station, both civil and 
military, and a numerous party of the most distinguished natives 



JJn'dcnce oj 1832, App. J. f 190/306], 

l' 4-1 



f 



32 Selections from Educational Records 

residing at or near Benares. It was concluded by an address in Sans- 
krit delivered by the Secretary (Lieutenant Fell), and by the committee 
awarding prizes to the most distinguished scholars/'* On the death 
of Lieutenant Ml — " a profound Sanskrit scholar " — the college 
appears again to have sunk into obscurity. 

The Hindu Sanskrit College at Calcutta with which document 14 
deals is described in Chapter V (p. 78), since its history aptly illustrates 
the early controversies between the orientalists and occidentalists. 
It may be stated here that it was opened in 1824- in place of the pro- 
posed colleges at Nadia and Tirhut, the establishment of which had 
been finally abandoned in 1821. It is not to be confused with the 
Calcutta Vidyalaya (also known under the names, Anglo-Indian College, 
Maha-Patshala, Hindu College or Native Hindu College — see pages 78, 
86, 87 and 183) which was opened in 1817, and which has since 
developed into the Presidency College. The Presidencj 7 ' College may be 
looked upon as a continuation of the senior department of the Vidy- 
alaya, while the Hare school is similarly a direct successor of its 
junior department. In 1823 a proposal for the common teaching of 
science to the students of the Sanskrit and Hindu Colleges was made 
(document No. 23) and on the foundation of the Presidency College this 
arrangement was continued. The Sanskrit College and the Madrassa 
still exist as separate institutions. The buildings of these institutions 
figure as frontispieces to this volume. The Sanskrit College is rather . 
confusingly called the Hindu College. 

Although it is hardly relevant to the general history of educa- 
tional development in India, the College of Fort William deserves some 
mention, as a striking educational institution of the time and as the 
subject of various interesting documents. The Marquis of Wellesley, 
impressed with the " sloth, indolence, low debauchery and vulgarity," 
which too often grew upon the younger servants of the Company, 
decided that they should have a proper education in Calcutta. The 
details regarding the foundation of the college are to be found in the 
Wellesley Despatches, volume II, pages 325 et sea. The Court of 

* Evidence of 1832, App. I. [203/400]. 



i 



4 



Institutions * 33 

Directors took strong exception to the foundation of this expensive 
institution, which narrowly escaped immediate extinction. In 1806 
the East India College at Haileybury was founded, whence the 
writers proceeded to the college at Fort William. A brief account 
of both institutions is extracted (document No. 13) from the report 
on the affairs of the East India Company, 1832. The Fort William 
College was abolished in 1854 and the Haileybury institution was 
finally closed in 1857. 

(11) At a Committee for the management of the Hindoo College at 

Benares on the 1st January 1804.* 

Present : 
Mr. T. Brooke, Acting President. 

Mr. G, Arbuthnot *) m l 
^ , • w > members. 

Captain Wilford ) 

Minute of the Acting President. 
Although it is the first time I have had the honor to meet the Gentlemen o' Benares College. 
the College Committee and will in all probability Jb e the last, yet the interest I Mr. ^ ro0 ^^ 
feel in the success of an institution which originally held out so much to promise Minute, 1804. 
and might still be rendered of great public utility, induces me to call to the notice 
of the Committee the disrepute into which the College of Benares has been 
suffered to fall, disrepute so notorious that it is forced on conviction from the 
slightest view of the perversion that exists, 

2. The College, instead of being looked up to by the natives with respect 
and veneration, is an object of their ridicule ; instead of an assemblage of 
learned Hindoos, it resembles a band of pensioners, supported by the charity 
of Government, 

3. To pretend to trace to its source the various causes which have led to 
this perversion is a task to which I confess myself unequal, but the experience 
of the past renders it evident that the reform must be radical, and that the 
Rules of the College if not totally changed must be completely new modelled ; 
if this is not done I am decidedly of opinion it would be advisable to recom- 
mend to Government the abolition of the institution. ^ 



* Printed m Skzich of the rise and progress oj the Benares Patshatta or Sanskrit College, etc, by 
G. Nichoixs, pp. 9*13, 



i. 



Selections from Educational Records 



Mr. Brooke's 4. It was the object of Mr* Duncan under whose auspices the institution 

Minute, 1801 — was founded to leave to the Rector the sole management and discipline of the 
contd. College ; by this precaution he expected that the Hindoos, on finding themselves 

unshackled by the control of Europeans, which their apprehensions might lead 
them to suj)posc would interfere with their ceremonies and religious prejudices, 
would flock to the college to receive instruction, and that the Professors would 
in time become ornaments to the sciences they had been selected to teach* 

5, In conformity to this intention, when Mr. Duncan left Benares, the 
College remained without any European Superintendence, but the consequences 
that resulted turned out the very reverse of Mr, Duncan's expectations ; for no 
sooner was Mr, Duncan gone, than the Rector assuming all the powers of his 
uncontrolled discipline, reduced the allowances which had been assigned to 
the Professors whilst he continued to draw from Government the full amount 
of their stipends ; vacancies of Professorships were filled up by men of little 
learning and less respectability, and many of the pupils whose maintenance 
was charged to Government had existence only in the Hector's pay rolls. 

G. To settle the disputes which had arisen from these various abuses, Govern- 
ment were pleased to constitute the present Committee and at its representation 
the Rector was expelled ; but although this occurred in April 1801, no successor 
has yet been appointed and the College remains without any regular head — the 
person who now superintends having been only appointed to the temporary 
charge and being pronounced by Captain Wilford deficient in that learning and 
that ..respectability which alone could entitle him to fill the vacancy. 

7, It is to be lamented so long a period has elapsed without attempting a 
reform but even now that I am strenuously pressing it to the consideration of the 
Committee, I confess I entertain doubts whether the Committee arc invested 
with powers to make those arrangements and alterations which are likely to 
render the institution respectable and useful. 

8. Should the Gentlemen of the Committee entertain the same doubt the 
first step to be taken is an application to His Excellency the Most Noble the 
Governor General in Council, the Visitor and Patron of the College, soliciting 
Ills Excellency to invest the Committee with full powers to make those arrange- 
ments and alterations as in their judgment and experience may be deemed 
essential. 

9, In framing an address fortius purpose to His Excellency, it will be proper 
His Excellency should be made acquainted with the outline of the plan which is 
to form the subject of deliberation of tho Committee. 

10. Without the assistance of the Gentlemen of the Committee I feel myself 
unequal to enter into a detail of the various points to which the attention of the 
Committee must be directed, but I shall cheerfully submit my suggestions on the 



Hindu College, Benares 35 

outline, in the confidence that their amendments and additions may load to the Mr. Brooke's 
accomplishment of that end which so justly calls for united exertion and Minute, ]S0J< 
unabated perseverance, contd, 

11. In the first place, it will be expedient to frame a set of Rules which 
are to comprise the controlling Authority and specific duty of the Committee; the 
Regulations for the College discipline; the power of the Rector and the duty of 
the Professors. 

12. As the fund appropriated by Government for the support of the 
College amounts only to 20,000 Rupees annually, it is my opinion the branches 
of learning to be taught in the College should be so limited as to enable the Com- 
mittee fo pav liberal salaries to the Professors in those sciences that mav be 
the object of their selection. This plan would ensure the assistance of the most 
learned of the Pundits, and which cannot be the ease if the institution is made 
to exceed the means by which it is supported; as any increase to the number of 
Professors must operate to the reduction in the salaries of the whole, 

13. As a furl her encouragement to learned Pundits seeking to gain admission 
into the college, the excellent suggestion made by Captain Wilford of pensioning 
the Pundits when they become old and too infirm to perform their duties should 
be reduced to practice. 

M. For this purpose the fixed and casual expenses of the College should bo 
formed on a scale to leave an annual Riving out of the 20,000 Rupees grunted by 
Government and which saving would form a fund whence I he proposed pensions 
might be Mipplied, and as 1 believe the full sum allowed by Government has 
not for sortie years past been expended on the College, it would be advisable 
to ?-o)icit Government to permit the difference between the annual disbursement 
and tho annual allowance being appointed towards this fund* The surplus annual 
saving might be invested in Government paper or remaining in tho hands of 
the Collector, Government might be elicited to allow an interest of 8 per cent on the 
amount, by whirh it is to be expected it would become an iwroa.sing fund, from 
whence other contingencies incidental to the institution might bo defrayed, 

3 5, Captain Wilford from his profound acquirement in the Sanscrit, being duly 
competent to report on the qualification of the Pundits who may be candidates 
for professorships, should be invited to give his assistance on this point, and ho 
will I trust acquiesce in tho solicitation that 1 now avail myself of preferring to 
him* 

1G. To assist Captain Wilford in an undertaking on which tho prosperity of 
the college so immediately depends I propose that a Commit tco of four of tho most 
learned Bramins that are to bo met with at Benares should bo invited to lend their 
assistance in attending on Captain Wilford in tho examination of the candidates 
that may offer themselves for professorships. 



* 



1 



36 Selections from Educational Records 

Mr. Brooke's 17. It is also proposed that none of the present Professors excepting those 

Minute $ 1804 — who were originally appointed by Mr. Duncan, shall be continued in their station, 
conclcL unlass approved of by Captain Wilford assisted by the proposed Committee of 

Bramins and reported by them qualified, by their learning and the respectability 

of their character for the station of Professors. 

18, The number of pupils under each Professor, the allowance to be granted 
them for their maintenance, the examinations that are to be made and a variety 
of other subordinate points are not enlarged on here, as they will be naturally 
comprised in the rules which I have suggested should be' framed for the college 
discipline. 

19. I cannot close my long intrusion on the Committee in a more satisfactory 
manner than by suggesting an application to Mr. Henry Colebrooke, Professor 
of Sanscrit and of the Hindu Laws in the College of Fort William, soliciting him 
to recommend to the College Committee of Benares Some learned Bramin who in 
his opinion may be equal to the duty of Rector and deserving of being appointed 
to that station. 

v ' (Sd.) T. BROOKE, 

Acting President 

College Committee, 
1st January 1804. 

(12) Accounts of tlie Calcutta Madrassa, September 1823. 
Statement of the salaries and wages due to the officers, students and 

SERVANTS OF THE MaDRASSA, INCLUDING CONTINGENCIES FOR THE MONTH OF 

-September 1823 • 

Rs. a* r. Rs. a. p. 



Secretary 500 0 0 

Native Assistant to the Secretary 100 0 0 

Teachers. 

Moolavcc Mohammed Saeed, Head Preceptor . * 300 0 0 

,» Wazecr Ah*, First under Preceptor . . 100 0 0 

ff Fazloor Rahman, Second under Preceptor . 80 0 0 

Abdul Majeed, Third under Preceptor . • 60 0 0 

Aajut Ali, Fourth under Preceptor * . 60 0 0 

- - : — 600 0 0 



j 



Accounts of the Calcutta Madrassa 



37 



Statement OE THE SALARIES AND WAGES DUE TO THE OFFICERS, STUDENTS AND 
SERVANTS OF THE MADRASSA, INCLUDING CONTINGENCIES, FOR THE MONTH OF 

September 1823 — contd. 



Students^ 1st class, at 15 Rupees each. 
17 present the whole month .... 

1 for 20 days ....... 

1 for 7 days 



Students, 2nd class, at 10 Rupees each 
32 present the whole month .... 
1 for 5 days 

Students, 3rd class, at S Rupees each, 
23 present the whole month . 

Servants. 



Contingent charges. 



Oil 

For repairing a door of Madrassa, 
6 Earthen water pots for maulec. 



Total Sicca Rs. 



Rs* A. p. Rs. A, P. 
255 0 0 ^ 
10 0 0 * 



3 S 0 



320 0 0 
1 10 8 



1 Khatib . 






* . * • 




20 


0 


0 


1 Librarian 






9 . • I 




32 


0 


0 


1 Hakim * 




* 


• * • * 




40 


0 


0 


1 Mouzen 


■ 




• . . . 




10 


.0 


0 


1 Hurkara 


* 


■ 


. . * • 




5 


0 


0 


1 Maulee . 


a 




* I • • 




4 


0 


0 


3 Durwans at Rs, 4 each 


. . • • 




12 


0 


0 


2 Sweepers at Rs. 4 each 


• a . • 




8 


0 


0 


1 Sub -sweeper 




* 


. * • • 




2 


0 


0 


1 Writer and 8 


tationery for 


library 




30 


0 


0 


1 Daftureo 






. a . . 




8 


0 


0 


2 BhTstis . 


> 




• • • . 




10 


0 


0 



2 8 0 
10 0 
0 3 G 



268 8 0 



321 10 S 



184 0 0 



181 0 0 



3 11 6 



2,158 14 2 



(Two thousands one hundred and fifty- eight and fourteon annas and two pi eg.) 

(Sd.) M. LUMSDEN, 

Secretary, M. O. 

Madrassa, 
The 3rd October 1823. 



i 



o 



r 



1 



Selections from Educational Records 



(13) Extract from the Report from the Select Committee of the House of 
Commons on the affairs of the East India Company, 16th August 
1832* 

Education : Civil Service. 

Hailcybwy and Concerning the qualifications required from a writer, previously to Ms 
^FoHW'IV °^ appointment, the evidence is not very specific ; they are fixed by regulations 
7 mvit framed by the Court of Directors and the Board of Commissioners. On an 

average young men proceed to India at the age of 18 : 22 is recommended as 

the most eligible age. 

It is stated by the Principal, whose evidence is very full and, detailed, that the 
design of the East India College at Haileybury, which was established in 1806, was 
to supply the great body of civil servants with an amount of qualification com- 
mensurate with the extent and importance of their functions in India, which 
qualification could not, at the time that the College was founded, have been 
otherwise procured. The nature of the combined course of study, the impractica- 
bility of acquiring it without a special institution, more particularly for oriental 
literature, and the tests required of the parties nominated, all form subjects of 
evidence. It is considered that it would be advisable to increase the age of 
students, by admitting them between the ages of 18 and 22. The Act of 1826 
is believed not to have answered the expectations of its authors, and to have 
shaken and mutilated the whole Collegiate system. The College, it is stated 
by the Principal, has had various difficulties to contend with, but has, in a great 
measure, fairly answered what could reasonably have been expected from it on its 
original foundation ; and it is held that, with revised tests, and some modifica- 
tions in its present machinery, it would be competent to stand even against the 
Universities of England, in so far as relates to the due qualification of Civil Servants 
for India. The proficiency of the scholars is well attested by those who have 
experienced its benefits and watched its progress. The capabilities are pointed 
out which the College possesses, of admitting alterations, so as to render the 
education more efficient and satisfactory ; and other modes of qualification for 
the Civil Service are suggested. It is maintained that the Civil Servants have 
been better educated since the establishment of the College than they were 
befoie ; and the fact, that the most important posts have been filled in India 
by those who have been most distinguished for proficiency at Haileybury is 
adduced in proof of this opinion : while the tenor of other parts of the evidence 
would show, that where the operation of the system has not been absolutely 



* London. Printed by ordor of the Honourable Court of Directors, January 1833, pp. 28-30. 



4 



Haileybury and Fort William Colleges 39 

prejudicial to tlio habits and views of the students, every object contemplated by the Haileybury and 
College might have been more effectually obtained by other means. - the College of 

On arriving in India, the young men of the Bengal service enter the College at Fort William — 
Calcutta, with the view of perfecting themselves in languages, the elements of which contd* 
have been acquired at Haileybury, where the education is of a more general 
nature. While at the College at Calcutta, they are maintained at the Company's 
expense. Of this institution (which was from tho commencement strongly object- 
ed to by the Court of Directors, on the score of expense) it is remarked, that " it 
has been a source of more debt than knowledge in the Civil Service, and an expen- 
sive establishment for the end proposed." It was not uncommon in former 
times for young men to leave the College with a debt of from 50,000 to a lakh of 
rupees ; but this evil may in part bo attributed to tho mode of appointment* 
The institution has lately undergone a revision. It has been useful in providing 
books, by which the acquisition of the native languages has been greatly 
facilitated, but beyond this it is considered that the institution is disadvantageous 
to the public service. If abolished, its buildings might be converted to public 
offices. 

It appears that the study of languages is most readily promoted by sending 
the young men, directly on their arrival, into tho Provinces, and attaching them 
to somo public office, as was formerly the practice. 

At Bombay there is no institution corresponding to that at Calcutta. At 
Madras there is a Collegiate institution, but no European professors, as formerly 
, at Calcutta ; the examiners are gentlemen in tho Company's civil service, but they 
receive no pay* Proficiency in the native languages is made a condition of 
promotion. 

With a view to raise the standard of attainment, and afford fuller scope for 
selection, not only is public competition in England recommended, but it is also 
proposed, with tho same view, that tho whole service should be originally mili- 
tary. Among other objections against this plan, it is urged that it evinces a total 
departure from the principles at present laid down by the Legislature for conduct- 
ing the two branches of Indian service.* 

(14) Report on the Sanskrit College, Calcutta, 31st January 1835. 
Gentlemen, 

Permit mo to submit to you tho usual report of the annual examination Sansknt College* 
of the students as well as of tho general state of the Sanskrit College. - Calcutta. 



* Sco also Aj>pendix L to tho 1832 report ; and lalso Memorials of* old Haileybury College, 
p. 237-242. 

g2 



1 

• 

40 Selections from Educational Records 



Sanskrit College, The College at tlie end of the year 1834 contains 181 students, 97 of whom 
Calcutta — contd. receive a monthly Stipend of from 5 to 8 Rupees from Government. They are, as 

formerly, divided into 10 Sanskrit classes under 10 Pundits and into 7 English 



Classes under 3 Teachers as follows : — 

Classes. Students. 

3 Sanskrit Grammar Classes composed of * .... 78 

1 „ class of Literature (Saliitya) composed of * * * 28 

1 „ „ Rhetoric (Alankara) composed of ... 10 

1 „ „ Mathematics (Jyotifih) composed of . . * 12 

1 „ „ Logic (Nyaya) composed of 7 

1 Jf ft Vedanta composed of .... 0 

1 f9 tt Law (Smriti) composed of ...» 21 

1 „ „ Medical (Vaidya) composed of # 13 



10 181 



The seven English Classes are composed of 83 students of the above divisions* 

It is with the greatest pleasure that I have to report to you at the end of 
the year 1834 the same general good conduct and satisfactory progress of the 
Sanskrit College which I had the honour to bring to your notice in my last annual 
report. I have only to repeat my previous commendation of the zeal and ability 
of the teachers and of the proficiency of the students in the 8 Sanskrit and 7 
English classes which I have examined. 

I beg to annex the report by Dr. Tytler of his examination of the Mathe- ; 
matical and Medical classes, which is as favourable as that of last year ; and , 
that of Dr. Grant, the lecturer of Anatomy and^Medicina Mr. Sutherland proposed 
on the part of the Committee of Examination of Law officers several law 
questions which have been answered'in writing by the students ; his report of 
their performances has been laid before the Committee. 

To these reports is joined that of the English classes by Mr. M. W. Woollaston. 
This meritorious professor has added a table of rules concerning discipline in 
which I entirely concur. 

You will find also his report of the translation class composed of three trans- 
lators who draw an extra allowance of Es. 4 each a month ; as well as an enu- * 
ineration of the works hitherto translated and of others proposed to bo translated. 
I beg to refer to my memorandum presented to you when the establishment of a 
translation class was proposed by me and sanctioned by you. I am happy to say 
that the success of this Small class has entirely answered your expectations, and I 
beg to add that since its commencement I have been confirmed in my opinion of 
the usefulness of translating good English works into Sanskrit, As no way what- 
ever uught to be neglected to communicate sound ideas of Science and morality 
to the Hindus, and as the thorough reform of a nation can be effected only by 



J! 



Sanskrit College, Calcutta 41 

attempting it by all legitimate means, direct and indirect, I venture to think Sanskrit College, 
that among those means that of gaining the attention of the learned Hindus by Calcutta — contd. 
translations into a language which they prefer to all and exclusively cultivate, is 
certainly not the least efficacious. 

After having had the honour of superintending as Secretary the Sanskrit 
College during 2 years and 8 months, I beg leave to submit to you as concisely as 
I can the result of my observations upon the general tenor of the studies pursued 
in this public Institution. 

The course of instruction pursued at the Sanskrit College is (as stated in the 
last printed report on the Colleges and Schools for native education) divided into 
two branches. The first is intended to give a command of the language, the second 
of such branches of Hindu Science as may bo an object to the student, especially 
law. 

The acquisition of Sanskrit is indispensable, not only for the study of the 
classical books composed in that language, but principally as the mother ^ 
language of a great number of Indian dialects, especially of the Bengalee. For 
it is by the knowledge of the first that the last must be improved and enriched 
to whatever extent it may be required to express all philosophical and scientific 
ideas, and to communicate therefore to the great mass of the people the new 
stores of philosophy, science, arts and morals which they are expected to derive 
from an acquaintance with western civilisation. It is obvious that a true and 
radical reform of a nation in learning and morality (which is the object of a good 
government) will begin and proceed with the improvement of their own national 
language. In this respect the study of Sanskrit cannot be sufficiently encouraged, 
since by this means the Bengalee dialect among others may be brought to a 
degree of perfection at least equal to that which the Italian, Spanish, French, 
English and other languages have more or less obtained from the Latin. 

The acquisition of Sanskrit appears perfectly insured by the method of teach- 
ing grammar practised in the college. It is generally acknowledged that this 
highly refined language has been fixed by the most accurate rules, and is taught 
by most ingenious methods which might with reason be censured for taxing the 
memory of the learner too severely, were they not purposely calculated for very 
young disciples to whom the exercise of memory is a paramount requisite in all 
future pursuits. 

The efficacy of the Hindu method of teaching the Sanskrit grammar is evinced 
in the firmness and security which the students almost without exception acquire in 
the knowledge and use of the mechanism of the language. After having com- 
pleted the course of grammar (the period of which is fixed at from 2 to 3 years) 
they find themselves enabled to understand with facility the compositions of their 
poets and to enunciate without hesitation the most complicated phrases in which 



♦ 



42 Selections from Educational Records. 

Sanskrit College, an enigmatic turn and arrangement of words, according to a peculiar taste of 
Calciitta—contd Hindu writers, has been aimed at as a perfection. This almost general capacity of 

Hindu boys will astonish those who have witnessed among European youths the 
great difficulty and rare proficiency in mastering the much less obscure and com- 
plicated style of the Latin and Greek, and even of their own national poetry* I 
do not hesitate to say that in the method of teaching the Sanskrit grammar there 
is no occasion for any change in the Sanskrit College. 

From the grammar classes the students enter that of general literature 
(called Sahitya) consisting mostly of poetical works, to which two years are 
allowed, and then that of rhetoric (Alankara) in which the theory of figurative 
language and literary composition is taught. This takes up another year. As 
among the Hindus the limits of poetry and rhetoric are by no means defined, the 
study of the two last classes is properly speaking but one; and if the number of 
the students is not very great, one teacher may be sufficient, and the period of 
time reduced from 3 to 2 years. 

After the course of- literature the students are required to study mathe- 
matics according to the old Hindu methods which, although very ingenious 
and more than adequate to the common exigencies of life, are less perfect than 
those derived amongst us from a much more improved condition of mathematical 
science than the Hindus ever attained. As a part of Hutton's Mathematics 
translated into Sanskrit has already begun to be used as a class book, the 
students will enjoy the benefit of an improved doctrine without being strangers 
to their national science the terms of which at least, as part of the languages, 
ought to be known to them. A year is given to the mathematical pupils who 
are at the same time obliged either to attend an English class or to apply to 
Sanskrit logic (Nyaya). 

Hitherto no treatise of the Western philosophy has been translated into 
Sanskrit which could be recommended as a class book to the Hindu students in 
conjunction vfltlx their own philosophical works. The last containing the funda- 
mental principles of perhaps all systems of Philosophy hitherto known, and a 
richness of metaphysical terms which surpasses that of all other languages are by 
themselves not unworthy of the veneration of the Hindus, and with respect to 
antiquity and originality cannot fail greatly to interest the investigator of the 
history of the human intellect. 

The study of law (Smriti) which is commenced after the completion of the 
course of poetry, rhetoric, and mathematics, offers itself as the most important 
branch of Sanskrit learning inasmuch as it is connected with the manifold concerns 
of practical life. The students read a number of classical law books and qualify 
themselves to answer the various questions of law. A commission of examina- 



Sansl-r.t College, Calcutta 



43 



tion appointed by Government* tries the proficiency of the pupils find grants certi- Sanskrit College, 
ficatcs of Panditship to the deserving candidates. Calcutta— contd. 

A period of six years is allowed to tho youths who have passed through the 
classes of grammar, literature, rhetoric and mathematics to complete their studies 
of philosophy and law. Considering that the confined number of class books 
hitherto accessible in the college do not sufficiently occupy the upper classes, tho 
period may, in my opinion, be reduced to 3, and the whole period of studies in 
the Sanskrit College which has hitherto been 12 years, may by a proper distribu- 
tion of time and matter be reduced to 8, allowing 5 to grammar, literature and 
mathematics, and 3 to law and philosophy. 

The students belonging to the medical caste of the Ilindus have the choice* 
instead of entering the cla<w of logic, to attend the medical lectures of the Sanskrit 
as well as of the English lecturer on medicine, and they do not study the law. 
As their object is to follow the profession of their fathers, they cannot but wish to 
acquaint themselves with the Hindu practice of physic and with the sorts of medi- 
cines most easily obtainable and most generally used in this country, on which 
account the study of Sanskrit medical books becomes indispensable to this class* 
Being acquainted with them only as a Superintendent of their Sanskrit learning, I 
feel great pleasure in bearing testimony that some of the best Sanskrit scholars 
of the college belong to the medical class. 

The study of the English language has hitherto been left optional to tho 
pupils of the Sanskrit College and I beg leave to express my conviction that it is 
expedient to leave it so. Tho inducement to acquire the language of the rulers of * 
the country is already so \*astly extended and so greatly productive of effect 
among the Hindus, that it does not require any addition, whilst any appearance 
either of coercion or of a political or religious design on the part of Government 
would alarm those Ilindus who preserve a somewhat too rigid and exclusive adher- 
ence to "their ancient and sacred language and customs. This adherence, in 
itself natural and legitimate, is in the present instance not only innocuous, 
but very useful : for if the Sanskrit language is worth preserving, by whom 
will it be better preserved than by a certain number of those who are exclusively 
devoted to it 7 Nor oven if none of the Sanskrit students, nearly one half of 
whom now learn English, applied to that language, would the number of about 
400 students in the two Sanskrit Colleges of Calcutta and Benares appear too 
great from a population of 51 millions contained in the Bengal Presidency. I 
may add that to render the acquisition of English imperative in the Sanskrit 
College will most likely induce a number of the non-paid students to leave it. 

The course of elementary instruction pursued by the English classes of tho 
college, being only less extensive on account of the portion of time occupied by 



44 Selections from Educational Records 

Sanskrit College, Sanskrit studies ; it will of course participate in all the progressive improvements 
Calcutta — which may be introduced into the latter. 

conoid* , The admission to the Sanskrit College was, conformably with the views of 

Government, most liberally gt anted to all boys qualified by pome knowledge of 
Bengalee letters, without exclusion of scarce any caste of the Hindus. The 
scholarships were bestowed on poverty joined to diligence and proficiency in study. 
The munificence of Government allowing about 100 scholarships, considered 
merely as such, is, I dare believe, well employed, and a perpetual theme of 
grateful praise among the natives* I cannot terminate thi< article without 
mentioning the name of Baboo Jinmcoimil Sen, one of the managers of the 
Hindu College, who, animated with the noble desire of being useful to his 
countrymen, shunned no trouble and spared no time to afford me his dis- 
interested assistance, not only in the selection of the bovs to be admitted and of 
those most recommendable for scholarships in consideration of their private circum- 
stance^, but also in superintending the Sanskrit library, procuring valuable 
manuscripts* conducting the interior economy of the College, and tendering me his 
advice for keeping up the discipline, and promoting the general .success of the 
institution. 

I have, etc, 

(Sd.)A. TROYER, 

Secretary to the Government Sanskrit College. 

Sanskrit Com^oi:, 

31st January 1835. 1 t 



*■ 



CHAPTER IV. 

* 

Mass Education and Organisation, 

The efforts of the Company's servants had hitherto been mainly 
concentrated on "higher institutions for the teaching of Sanskrit and 
Arabic. Lord Hastings had declared that the strength of the Govern- 
ment in India must be based not on the ignorance but on the enlighten- 
ment of the people. But efforts in the direction of founding common 
schools of instruction in the vernacular had for the most part emanated 
from missionaries. There were the Tanjore schools founded by Swartz, 
those at Cuddalore founded by Kiernandcr, and others/ In Bengal 
there were Marshma n's schools for the people and May's Chinsura 
schools f which in 1810 numbered thirty with over 2,000 pupils. In 
Bombay a .Society for promoting the education of the poor was 
formed as the result of a voluntary assembly of the inhabitants of that 
city which took place in the vestry room (1815) ; donations created a 
hind of Bs. 20,000; the Court of Directors gave a monthly grant of 
Bs. 500 : and schools were established both for Christians and for 
natives.J A little later, in 1817 and 1819 respectively, the Calcutta 
School Book Society and the Calcutta School Society were founded, for 
the diffusion of useful elementary knowledge and the establishment 
of native schools throughout the country* Both received grants from 
Government. Howell says of the grant to the latter that it was " the 
first recognition on the part of the Home Government of the claims 
of education for the masscs."§ 



* Thv 1767 despatch fo Madras (pp. 3. * alwvo) «i5*» that Swart/ "prnvnilcd on tho Rajth of 

Tjinjorc to ctnHiih nchool* for traclung English," lutt IVhor [220/ 1 IS] only speak h of instruct- 

in;; the rmtt\c ( j ; nnd 0, Smith in hin Short History of Christ inn Minion* (p. 1 13) forms thorn vernacular 
rchool-t* 

t EiiAtnt* of 1&32, App. I [200/103], 

♦ J I idem [220/418]. 

5 Education in tlriti* 1 India, p, 13, 

( « ) 



46 



Selections from Educational Records 



That grant was mado in 1823 (a year which in more ways than 
one marks a turning point in the history of Indian education). It was 
about this time too that the attention of the Company's servants 
began to be seriously turned to the villages and the mass of 'the 
people. 

In July 1822 Sir Thomas Munro recommended that information 
should be obtained of the state of education in the provinces under 
the Madras Government. The result, as already stated (page 3), 
showed 188,650 under instruction out of a population of 12,850,941. 
In January 1825 the Governor and Council of Bombay recorded 
reports from some districts in that presidency, from which we learn 
that the proportion of pupils under instruction to the population was 
1 in 133. The details of these two smveys are embodied in Fisher's 
memoir. The memoir also gives the results of similar reports in 
other parts of India. In September 1823 the Committee of Public 
Instruction (Bengal) asked local agents for information about existing 
education (document No. 19). To this enquiry there are no specific 
replies recorded, but certain of the information which was collected is 
embodied in the first report of the Committee, written by H. H. Wilson 
in 1831. Later (1835-1838) W. Adam's reports on the state of education 
in Bengal give certain facts relating to indigenous education. For 
one division Adam's figures show that from 21 to 16 per cent, of the 
population between the ages of 5 and 14 were receiving instruction 
in different localities. 

These surveys revealed a lamentable decay in learning, the number 
of its votaries and its quality. In the course of the Madras survey 
indeed, a report was received from Mr. Campbell, Collector of Bellary, 
which is not altogether pessimistic about the instruction imparted, 
though he comments on the paucity of scholars, the poor quality of 
books studied, the fact that their language was often quite unintelli- 
gible to the readers, and the inability of the teachers. An extract is 
reprinted as document No. 18. But the tone adoj>ted is generally 
gloomy, as in Lord Moira's minute contained in the last chapter, and 
in Adam's report on Bengal. 



Mass education and organisation. 

Tie causes of tliis decay were difficult to assign in view of the 
lack of information regarding the earlier conditions of education. A / 
general idea prevailed that there had been retrogression. Lord Moira 
(document No. 9) observed the numerous grants made by native 
governments for education and deplored their diversion to the private 
property of individuals. The Collector of Bellary, already quoted, 
ascribed this to the competition of foreign goods, the movement of 
troops and the substitution of European for native rule, which, despite 
a less rigorous enforcement of the revenue, had impoverished the 
country. Sir Thomas Munro, too, entertained no doubt that educa- 
tion had been better in earlier times, but, writing in 1826, stated 
that " it does not appear to have undergone any other change than 
what arose from the number of schools diminishing in one place and 
increasing in another, in consequence of the shifting of the popula- 
tion, from war and other causes." Nor, taking into consideration 
the facts that the female population is almost wholly destitute of 
education and that many children are under private tuition, does he 
take an unhopeful view of the situation. He estimates the number of . 
those under instruction to be nearer one- third than one-fourth of the 
male population of school-going age, and " low as the state of 
education in India is admitted to be, compared with that of our own 
country, it is even now, he thinks, higher than it was in most Euro- 
pean countries at no very distant dates." But it is to be noted that 
' Sir Thomas Munro calculated only one-ninth of the male population 
as of school-going age. Adam, on the other hand, says of Bengal : 
" I am not acquainted with any facts which permit me to suppose 
that in any other country- subject to an enlightened government, and 
brought into direct and constant contact with European civilization, 
in an equal population, there is an equal amount of ignorance with 
that which has been shown to exist in this district."* 

Such divergent views were only natural. The condition of the 
country can hardly have permitted of very accurate reports either of * 
pupils or of population. The data for comparison with an earlier age 

i 11 ■ ... _ — _. ._ . _ — — . 

* Adah's Reports on Vernacular Education* Ed. by Rov .T. Long, p, 137. 

h2 



48 



Mela-lions jrom Educational Itccords 



were lacking. The present was separated from the past by the welter 
of confusion which succeeded the breakdown of the *Mo£hul Empire. 
" The increasing wan-,** as Lotd Moira naid, 44 which had harassed 
all parts of India, left everywhere their invariable e/feefK.'* The 
Company had at first been engaged in trade at certain cent res. The 
disturbed state of the country had forced it into interference and 
finally into the administration of ever-extending dominions. During t his 
later phase its hands had been full with the suppression of lawless* 
ncss. "While still in the midst of this tusk and on the eve of entering 
on some of its most critical s{ rubles, it had recognised the claims of 
education by allocating a grant, and at a still earlier date had been at 
trouble to maintain seats of oriental learning. H was not till 2 823-2*1 
that it could pause to look round and take slock* of the situation 
from a broader point of view. In that year the Hon'blc MounUtunrt 
Elphinstone, Governor of Bombay, wrote as follows :* — 

" With rogard to the education of flu' poor, that mu'-l in nil Magis of M>ne!y 
b<» in a good measure the charge of the Government ; mm Adam Smith (tho 
political writer of all others who ha* jmt the Mrietest limits to the interference 
of the executive IJovermnont, especially in education) ml»M« the in-tnirtion of 
the poor to be among the ncee^ary expotiM"; of the Sovereign, though he scarcely 
allow* any other expense except for the defence of the nation and the administra- 
tion of justice.'* 

In that year, too, the amount of the revenue disbursed for educa- 
tion suddenly rose from £7,20S to £2I,S8*i and increased the next year r 
to £0G,o(i3.t 

The surveys described above were set- afoot. Finally, where this 
had not already been done, steps were taken to organise administra- 
tive machinery which should deal systematically with the grants and 
investigate the needs of the country. 

At the conclusion of this chapter arc printed as documents Nos. 1G 
and 17 a letter of July 3S23 appointing a general committee of public 

* Evidence vj JS3L\ Aj>p, /, So. 22 (3?.V.itSj. 

| See the resolution, tinted I7th Jiunmry 182-1 (document Xo. :.0). TliN rerdtitioii decide* Out 
M tho tihsijjnmunt of tho Inc of rujHi's «dinll Like effect from the yiwr just mentioned (1821-22), mid that 
for ench of tho yenra 1821-22, 1822-23 tlio mm of Its. 83,200 thall bo carried to the credit of tho Corn, 
miltoo of Instruction." 



Mass education and organisation 49 

instruction for the Bengal Presidency and a note, which inspired 
that letter, by Mr. Holt Mackenzie ; also the letter \vhich } in September 
of the same year, the Committee issued to local Agents (document 
No. 19) and the Governor General's Resolution of January 1824 
(document No. 20). Campbell's report on education in Bellary written 
in 1823 (document No. 18) and Sir Thomas Munro's Minute of 1826 
(document No. 21) give an account of the state of education in the 
Madras Presidency and of the means taken to improve it. These will 
serve to indicate the intention and scope of the operations. 

Noticeable among these symptoms of recognition of the claims of 
the masses is the emphasis early laid upon the training of teachers. 
Writing of the reports made in Bombay in 1825 Mr, Secretary Farish 
says :* — 

<c It seems one of the greatest objections to establishing numerous new 
schools at once, that the persons who would be employed, might be expected (from 
the experience we have already acquired) to oppose or to neglect the introduction 
of any improvements whether in the matter or the manner of instruction, without 
a much more vigilant European superintendence than could possibly be afforded. 
A great delay in the establishing of schools at the presidency has arisen from the 
necessity of educating the school master in the first instance, and a number of 
youths are with that view under instruction. If, therefore, it be resolved, that 
Government should assist in establishing schools where they are not, the first 
step for rendering them really useful would be to collect youths for the purpose of 
instructing them according to a proper system, and in proper books and branches 
of knowledge, and after they have attained sufficient to qualify them for the duty 
at a school which can bo ably superintended, to appoint them to the schools for 
which they have been selected. 

With such masters the improved system will be carried on ; by the influence 
of the same motive which in the other masters would oppose improvement, they 
would teach in the manner in which they had been taught, in the only way 
they understood. 

The extension of education by this means might not be so great in the first 
three years, as it would be by establishing at once schools with such masters as are 
now to be met with, but after that it would extend as speedily and much more 



* Evidence of 1832, App. I [240/126]. 



50 



* 

Selections from Educational Records 



cMcwntly. Jt would not, however, he* without difficulty, for it will probably meet 
with opposition from the prt^ont Uudicto/' 

In March 18*25 the Court of Directors wrote lo the Governor- 
General in Council ol Bengal as follows:* — 

*' We recently Mtictiowd u #nml of Mmilir amount to tho Calcutta Jkhool 
Book Society, and on the Kime grounds \w\ huw no Invitation in Mucti<ming tho 
present grant. The Calcutta School Society uppers to combine with its arrange- 
ments for giving elementary instruct ion an nrnnvjrtMiUMit of *till gnvtt^r import* 
nnc<\ for educating teacher* for the indigenous **choo!<. The Ja^t object wo 
deem worthy of great encouragement, since it h the character of the 

indigenous hchools that the education of the great nm c * of tie 1 population mu^t 
ultimately (Upend, Ity training up therehue w vlv^ of teachers you provide for 
the eventual extendi* n of improve*! eduention to a portion of the natives of India, 
far exceeding that whivh anv Wcmtnfurv instruction* tln\t could he immediutWv 
bestowed, would have any chance of reaching." 

* 

■Similarly in t he case of Madras (a IVeMdency in which the training 
of teachers has always been regarded an of t lie highest importance), 
the CWrt of Directors, in their despatdi of the HHh April 182S,f 
ap]>lauded Sir Thomas Monro's proposal to establish a school for that 
purpose; and, in 1830, the Seiietarv to the Committee for Native 
Education laid before Uovernmcnt an elaborate scheme for a normal 
school .J 

Such were the reviews made of the education of the masses and the 
plans for its dissemination and improvement. The excellent intentions 
of those who initiated these movements were defeated by the vastness 
of the task, the paucity of available funds and growing demands for 
concentration of etTort upon institutions of higher learning. The theory 
of the downward permeation of knowledge prevailed — largely, one 
suspects, because the opposite theory led to impossible palhs.§ The 
subject of mass education belongs more properly to later volumes of 



* Sec. S8 ot tlio dwpntch of 0th Match 1823. Priiitvtl in Iho Vtultnt* of 1S3L\ App. /, No. 7 
[332/188], 

f Evidence of 1S3'J, A pp. L No. 10 [3CO.G0S] t MiuJrm Sehdion*, ii, 1S55, XX III. , 
i Madras Selection*, it. 1SS5, XCIX. 

§ Document No. 17, included in this chapter, illual rales the theory. 



Mass education and organisation 51 

this series. But it is permissible to touch on the typical happenings 
in Madras, Sir Thomas Munro (document No- 21) proposed two schools 
of a superior type in each Collectorate and one school in each of 300 
tahsildaris. (His remarks about the sufficiency of the pay of tahsildari 
school masters are particularly interesting ; it was pitched at Us. 9 
a month, supplemented by an equal amount from fees, the rate of 
which was surprisingly high.) The Court of Directors, in their despatch 
of the 16th April 1828, approved this plan and authorised the gradual 
appropriation of Us. 50,000 for the new system of education. But, 
in a subsequent despatch of the 29th September 1830,* they complained 
of the failure of that system to provide for higher education. The 
Directors wrote as follows : — 

# # # # H* * 

" By the measures originally contemplated by your Government, no provi- 
sion was made for the instruction of any portion of the natives in the higher 
branches of knowledge. A further extension of the elementary education which 
' already existed, and an improvement of its quality by the multiplication and 
diffusion of useful books in the native languages was all that was then aimed 
at. It was indeed proposed to establish at the Presidency a central school for the 
education of teachers, but the teachers were to be instructed only in those 
elementaiy acquirements which they were afterwards to teach in the Tahsildari 
and Collectorate schools. 

" The improvements in education, however, which most effectually contribute 
to elevate the moral and intellectual condition of the people, are those which 
concern the education of the higher classes ; of the persons possessing le : sure 
and natural influence over the minds of their countrymen* By raising the 
standard of instruction among these classes, you would eventually produce a 
much greater and more beneficial change in the ideas and feelings of the com- 
munity than you can hope to produce by acting directly on the more numerous 
class. 

* " You are moreover acquainted with our anxious desire to have at our dis- 
posal a body of natives, qualified by their habits and acquirements to take a larger 
share and occupy higher situations in the civil administration of their country 
than has hitherto been the practice under our Indian Governments. The 



* tfiithncr of 1832, App. 1 9 No. 21 [364/G11]; Madras Selections, ii, l&55 t X^VII, 



Selections from Educational Records 



measures for native education, which have as yet been adopted or planned a ^ 
your Presidency, have had no tendency to produce such persons. 55 

The measures taken in Bengal for the education of the higher 
classes in English were held up as worthy of imitation and the desire 
expressed that similar measures should be adopted in Madras. In a 
minute, dated the 12th December 1839,* Lord Elphinstone stated 
that the endeavours made in the Presidency to introduce a general 
system of education had produced nothing but disappointment and 
that their discontinuance had been ordered. " A new direction was to 
be given to our efforts, and the plan which had been found to succeed 
in Bengal and Bombay was to be introduced, with such modifications 
as local circumstances might require at Madras." Among the 
principal points urged upon the attention of the Madras authorities 
by the Supreme Government and the General Committee was <e the 
discontinuance of the system of frittering away the sums allowed 
for educational purposes, upon more elementary schools and upon 
eleemosynary scholars." These instructions read strangely. The main \ 
reason underlying them had already been made clear in a despatch 
from the Court of Directors to the Governor General in Council, dated 
the 5th September, 1827.f Speaking of Mr. Eraser's Delhi schools 
and Dr. Gerard's proposals for the education of the hill people of 
Sabathu, the Directors said : " From the limited nature of the means 
at your disposal, you can only engage in very limited undertakings ; 
and where a preference must be made, there can be no doubt of the 
utility of commencing both at the place of greatest importance, and 
with the superior and middle classes of the nations, from whom the 
native agents whom you have occasion to employ in the functions of 
Government are most fitly drawn, and whose influence on the rest 
of their countrymen is the most extensive." The upshot of Lord 
Elphinstone's minute was the proposal to establish at Madras " a 
central collegiate institution or university," to which no pupils should 



* Madras Selections if, 1855, CXXII. 

t Evidence of 1S32, App, J, No. S [333/489]; Madras Selections, if, 1S55, 3 



Mass education and organisation 53 

be admissible in any department but sucli as could read and write the 
English language intelligibly. The documents which occupy the re- 
mainder of this volume relate mainly to the initiation and pursuit of 1 
the policy of introducing modern education. 



(15) Resolution, dated the 17th July. 1823* 

In pursuance of the intention alrendy announced in the orders passed on the Resolution con- 
report recently received from the Madrissa Committee, the Governor General in slttuting the Com- 
Council resolves, that there shall be constituted a General Committee of Public mittcc of Public 
Instruction for the purpose of ascertaining the state of public education in this Instruction 
part of India, and of the public institutions designed for its promotion, and of 1S23/ 
considering and from time to time submitting to Government the suggestion of 
such measures, as it may appear expedient to adopt with a view to the better 
instruction of the people, to the introduction among them of useful knowledge 
and to the improvement of their moral character, 

2. The Governor General in Council is also pleased to resolve, that the cor- 
respondence of Government with the Committee to bo appointed as above, and 
with the other Committees, which may be maintained for the management of 
individual institutions, shall be henceforth conducted by the Persian Secretary 
to Government. 

3. To that officer therefore the detailed instructions of Government to the 
constitution and duties of the Committee to be appointed as above, to the 
alterations, which it may consequently become expedient to make in the consti- 
tution and functions of the several existing Committees, to the mode in which 
the correspondence of Government on tho subject of public education is to bo 
brought on the records, will be communicated, 

4. Tho Governor General in Council deems it sufficient to record in this 
Department his Resolution, subject of course to the approval of tho Honourable 
the Court of Directors, to appropriate to the object of jmblic education tho sum 
of one lac of rupees per annum, in addition to such assignments as were made by 
the British Government, previously to the act of fhe 53rd of his late Majesty ; and 
likewise of course exclusively of any endowments which may have been, or may 
be made by individuals, applicable to a like purpose. 



* Printed in Bengal : Past and Present, VIII, 1914, p. 93 ; nnd in part in Howfxl : Education 
in India, prior to 1854, etc*, pp. 



■ 



54 Selections from Educational Records 

Resolution o] 5, Ordered that the necessary communication "be made to the Persian Secretary 

17th J nhj, 1823 to Government, and that that officer be furnished from this and other Deparfc- 
— concJd. ments with all necessary papers, relating to the subject of public instruction. 

N Ordered that a copy of the above Resolution be sent to the several Depart- 

Political Department, Judicial ments > ^specified in the margin, for the purpose 
Department, General Depart stated in the last paragraph of it.* 

raent* 

(16) Letter, dated 31st July 1823 \ from Government, appointing members 

of the General Committee of Public Instruction. 

Gentlemen, 

Letter of appoint- I am directed to inform you that the Hon'ble the Governor General in 

ment, 31st July Council has been pleased to appoint you a General Committee of public instruc- 
1823, tion for the purpose of ascertaining the state of public education under the 

Presidency of Fort -William and of considering and from time to time sub- 
mitting to Government the suggestions of such measures as it may appear 
expedient to adopt with a view to the better instruction of the ' people, to the 
introduction of useful knowledge including the sciences and arts of Europe, and 
to the improvement of their moral character. Sir. Harington has consented to 
assume the office and designation of President of your Committee and it is to 
be understood that the Persian Secretary to Government for the time being will be 
a Member ex-offieio. In the absence on public duty or otherwise of the President 
the senior member will preside, at your deliberations assuming the character 
and designation of Vice-President, x 

% Fox your further information I am desired to transmit herewith copy of 
the Resolution passed in the Territorial Department on the 17th instant regard- 
ing the institution of a Committee of Public Instruction, and the model in which 
the correspondence of Government on the subject of education is hereafter to 
be conducted. The same document will apprize you of the funds which it has 
been determined to appropriate "(subject to the approval of the Hon'ble the 
Court of Directors) to the object of public education. 

3. It is unnecessary at this stage of the proceedings to enlarge on the objects 
contemplated by Government in the institution of your Committee, or on the 
general views and sentiments at present entertained by the Governor General m 



* The first committee was composed of T. H. Harington, J. P* Larkins, W. B. Martin, W, B. 
Bayley, B. Shakespeare, Holt Mackenzie, H* T* Prineep, A. Sterling, J, a C. Sutherland, with H. H. 1 
Wilson as Secretary* 



1 



^ t 

Appointment of Members of Committee 55 

Council regarding the most expedient and judicious means of carrying them Letter of appoint 
into effect. The consideration of those, topibs will naturally arise out of the ment , 31st J uly 
reports and suggestions to be submitted by you, a primary purpose of which 1823 — contd. 
will be to collect a body of facts and opinions, on a comparison and examination 
t of which the only safe and practical conclusions can be formed, I am directed 
therefore to confine this communication to the following instructions and ob- 
servations relative to the constitution and functions of your Committee, the 
object to which your attention should in the first instance be more immediately 
given and the questions of a general nature which the Government is desirous of 
referring for your early and deliberate consideration and report. 

4. The Governor General in Council has resolved that your Committee shall 
exercise through sub-committees or individual members, as may appear to you 
most expedient, thfe superintendence of all the Government seminaries at the 
Presidency, an arrangement which will, of course, supersede the necessity of 
maintaining separately the existing Madrissa and Sanskrit College Committees. 
The Governor General in Council leaves it to your discretion to determine the 
particular mode of conducting the above branch of your duties, and until this be 
definitely arranged, the superintendence should be exercised by you collectively, 
in which case the order of the President and majority of the members will, of 
course, be sufficient authority for the issue of any instructions on application. 

5. To aid you in the management and execution of the detailed business 
of the office now confided to you, the following secretaries will be immediately 
appointed, viz., Dr, Lumsden, Secretary in the Madrissa and Mahommedan 
School Department, with his present allowances ; Lieutenant Price, Secretary for 
the Hindu College and Hindu Schools, with a salary of Us, 300 per mensem. 

6. It appears to Government proper also, that a General Secretary should 
be appointed to your Committee, and Dr. Wilson, your junior member, will 
accordingly be requested to undertake the duty. The Governor General in 
Council has been pleased to assign an allowance of S. Rs. 500 per mensem to 
be drawn by the gentleman holding the above situation, to cover all charges for . 
office rent and establishment. 

7. The correspondence of the Mofussil Committee at Benares, and of any 
others which may be hereafter established in the Provinces, will be conducted 
through the General Committee, It will of course be your duty to bring 

^regularly to the notice of the Governor General in Council the annual reports of 
the local Committees, as also all statements or suggestions which they may be at 
any time desirous to have communicated to Government with your own senti- 
ments thereupon. 

8. The Governor General in Council requests that you will open an early 
communication with the Local Agents throughout the Provinces, to ascertain 

i2 



** 



56 



Selections from Edncatimal Records 



Letter of ayipoint- what endowments exist in the several districts under this Presidency applicable 
mcnt, 31st July to purposes of education. 

1823 — contd. g # Tk e Local Agent at Agra having already submitted in the Territorial 

Department propositions regarding the appropriation of a fund which it has 
been determined by Government to apply to purposes of public instruction, you 
_ t f , . 0 will be pleased to take them into your immediate 

Letter from the Acting Secretary -i * ™ l7 , • -i ■ 

to the Board of Revenue in the W, consideration, more especially those contained in 
P., dated 13th July, 1822, with its ^eir fetter, dated 19th April, 1822. The corre- 

severfil enclosures 

spondence on the subject is herewith transmitted in 
original as per margin, 

10. You are requested to give your early attention to the completion of the 
arrangements for the construction of the proposed Hindoo College of Calcutta, and 
the new Madrissa. In determining finally on the plans of those edifices, you mil 
of course advert fully to *any change in their form and distribution which may 
be required by the change contemplated in the studies and discipline of the 
institutions, under the resolution of Government, to introduce European science 
as far as practicable. 

11. It will be an especial and material part of your duty to report, after due 
enquiry and reflection, on the points adverted to in the 7 th paragraph of the Eesolu- 
tion of Government in the Territorial Department, dated 21st August, 1821, and 
also on the different questions of a general nature embraced in the letter of the 
Madrissa Committee, dated 30th May last, on which the Government reserved 
its determination. Amongst these, none are of more serious importance than 
the consideration, in communication with the principal judicial and revenue 
authorities, how the acquirements of the students at the different seminaries can 
best be rendered available for the benefit of the public, and again, how the 
constitution of public offices and the distribution of employments can be made 
the means of exciting to study and of rewarding merits. * 

12. The Governor General in Council observes that your Committee cannot, 
of course, exercise any authority over private schools, but you will naturally com- 
municate with, and encourage all persons, native and European, who may be 
engaged in the management and support of such institutions, and will afford your 
assistance in providing for the safe custody and improvement of any funds which 
may be devoted to the object of education by individuals. 

13. The officers of Account will be directed to prepare regular accounts 
of the receipts r and disbursements of all institutions now existing, and will also 
hereafter carry to the credit of the Committee, a sum equivalent to the amount 
which Government has resolved to appropriate, deducting the annual expense 
of institutions established since the new Charter for which funds had not been 
assigned previous to its enactment. 



Appointment of Members of Committee . 

■r 



57 



14* The correspondence which it will be necessary for your committee at Letter of appoint- 
present to refer to will be found, with exception to tlie documents now transmitted, meni-31sl Jidy 
on tbe records respectively of tbe Calcutta Madrissa and Sanskrit College Com- 1823— concld. 
mittees. 

I have the honour to be, etc., 

(Sd.) A. STIRLING, 

Acting Deputy Persian Secretary to 

Government 

31st July, 1823. 
To 

The Hon'ble J. H, Harington, 

J. P. Larkins, Esq., 

W. B. Martin, Esq., 

W. B. Bayley, Esq., 

H. Shakespeare, Esq., 

H. Mackenzie, Esq., 

H. T. Prinsep, Esq., 

J. C. Sutherland, Esq., 

A* Stirling, Esq., and 

H. H. Wilson, Esq. 

(17) Note, dated the 17th July 1823, by Mr. Holt Mackenzie* 

Government being desirous of pursuing a systematic course of proceeding in H. Mackenzie 9 s 
regard to public education, and having its attention especially directed to the note. 
objects specified in the act of the 53d of the late King, I beg leave to submit a 
few things that have occurred to me on the subject. 

The first step is to settle the ultimate object to be aimed at: for otherwise 
we may debate about the means without end. It is not then I conceive the wish 
of Government that the people should be merely taught what is necessary to 
make them expert agents of the civil administration of the country as now 
administered. It is not desired to keep from them any species of knowledge that 
can enlighten their minds or improve their moral feelings* Caution indeed must be 
used in admitting the light to the morbid sense. But the darkness is not the 
- - less deplored : nor its ultimate removal the less sought. The probable effects, 



* Territorial Department, Revenue OonsvXtalions^ dated 17th July, 2823, No. 1. 



58 Selections from Educational Records 

H. Mackenzie's though distant, of the more general diffusion of knowledge are not blinked. But 
note — contd. to keep the people weak and ignorant that they may be submissive is a policy 

which the Government decidedly rejects. Its aim is to raise the character, to 
strengthen the understanding, to purify the heart ; and whatever therefore can 
extend the knowledge of the people, whatever can give them a juster conception 
of the true relation of things, whatever can add to their power over the gifts of 
nature or better inform them of the rights and duties of their fellow men, what- 
ever can excite invention and invigorate the judgment, whatever can enrich 
the imagination and sharpen the wit, whatever can rouse to steady exertion 
and bind to honest purposes ; whatever fits man to bear and improve his lot, to 
render his neighbour happy, and his country prosperous ; whatever in short 
tends to make men wiser and better and happier here and hereafter — all are 
desired to be given, in due season, to the people of India. 

Nothing therefore can be more comprehensive than the design. Its different - 
parts must indeed be filled up gradually- and with well measured steps. Its comple- 
tion we must leave to our children's children. But still if the ultimate object 
be as I have stated, it follows that the points to be considered in fashioning any 
scheme for its attainment are infinitely numerous and all very important ; that 
good scheme can be the result only of much and anxious thought, earnestly 
employed with the resources of accurate and varied knowledge. It must at 
once be considered what the people possess and what they want, what we can 
give them and what they are capable of receiving profitably, what they are and 
what they may become, and what their probable participation in the several steps 
of the great change which a general diffusion of true knowledge will doubtless 
produce. 

To embrace a field so extensive as that of which I have attempted to give a 
slight sketch, it will obviously be necessary that Government should, as it pro- 
poses, seek the aid of a Qommittee combining a variety of talent and acquirement. 
And if I have rightly stated the purposes N of Government, it follows that the 
persons to be selected for the duty should be those, who are not only deeply 
impressed with the importance of the work, but are entirely free from any narrow 
views, that would lead them to withhold horn the people the full measure of 
knowledge,, which they are in the capacity bo receive. It follows too, if there be 
truth and excellence in European science, that the introduction of it among the 
natives of India, must necessarily be one, and an early part of the, general scheme 
and should authoritatively be indicated by Government as such. 

As to the means of instruction, they are obviously very numerous. 
Different individuals will approve different plans. Some would' encourage schools 
for the elements of learning* Some prefer colleges for the higher branches. Of 
these, some would encourage existing, others would establish new institutions. 



Note by Holt Mackenzie 



Some would instruct teachers only, some would merely provide books, some J7, Mackemiejs 
would teacli the English language, others would look to the introduction of English note— contd. 
science through translations. Some would look to the learned classes, others to the 
wealth}', others to the general community. 

In so wide a range, I cannot pretend to anything like a full conception of 
the subject. Indeed whatever may be my zeal for the cause (and as a Briton 
and a Christian it ia impossible, I should regard it with indiSerence) I want the 
knowledge that would entitle me to decide with any confidence. 

I shall be glad to see all the instruments, I have specified, with others that 
have escaped me, brought into action. But my present impression is, that 
Government should apply itself chiefly to the instruction of those who will them- 
selves be teachers (including of course in the term many, who never appear as 
professed masters, and also translators from the European into the native 
languages) and to the translation, compilation and publication of useful works. 
These objects being provided for, the support and establishment of colleges for the 
instruction of what mav be called the educated and influential classes seem to 
me to be more immediate objects of the care of Government than the support and 
establishment of elementary schools ; thoxxgh these in particular places may claim 
attention. 

To provide for the education of the great body of the people seems to be 
impossible, at least, in the present state of things. Fox the ordinary purposes of 
life, the means of education are not, I imagine, ill supplied, though doubtless 
the native seminaries are susceptible of much improvement, and this at a cheap 
rate, by assisting them, both with books and masters. The great body of the 
people are, however, too poor and too anxious for service to allow their children 
to remain long under tuition. Moreover the value of the Parish Schools in 
England, whence we derive our notions of the advantages of general education, 
depends greatly on the religion of the country. Take from the peasant his Bible, 
and (if it be possible) the knowledge and sentiments that have flowed from that 
sacred source, and how worthless will be his lowly literature. The education 
indeed of the great body of the people can never, I think, be expected to extend 
beyond what is necessary for the business of life ; and it is only therefore 
through religious exercises, which form 'a great part of the business of life, that 
the labourer will turn his thoughts on things above the common drudgery, by 
which he earns his subsistence* Hence it is under the Christian scheme alone, 
that I should expect to find the labouring classes really educated : and their 
station in the scale of instructed and humanized beings will, I imagine, be 
pretty closely proportioned to their piety. We have no such instrument, with 
which to work beneficially on the lower orders here. Further the natural course 
of things in all countries seems to be that knowledge introduced from abroad 



V 



60 Selections from Educational Records 

H. Mackenzie's should descend from the higher or educated classes and gradually spread through 
note— contd. their example. We surely cannot here, at least expect the servant to prize a 

learning, which his master despises or hates. The influence of Europeans, if 
they use not the influential classes of the native community, must necessarily 
be very confined. What is taught in our schools will only be thought of there* 
Our scholars, if of the common people when they enter the world, will find no 
sympathy among their fellows, and until the lessons of the master, or 
professor become the subject of habitual thought and conversation, they cannot 
touch the heart, they will little affect the understanding. The acquirement will 
be an act of memory, with little more of feeling or reflection than if 
nonsense verses were the theme. 

Hence my notion is, that the limited classes, who are now instructed (with 
great labour certainly whatever may be the use) in the learning of the country, 
should be the first object of attention. This, of course, implies the association of 
oriental learning with European Science, and the gradual introduction of the 
latter, without any attempt arbitrarily to supersede the former. It implies too 
the support and patronage of existing institutions, so far at least as the fur- 
nishing them with Masters and supplying them with translations. And further, 
if our means suffice, it implies a more positive encouragement to learned 
Natives, and consists well with the resolution (supposing the funds for the first 
objects supplied), to establish new institutions for the instruction of natives in 
the learning of the East, and of the West together. 

It will probably be thought sufficient to have two Sanscrit Colleges, for the 
encouragement of Hindoo literature, and for the instruction of Pundits for our 
Courts ; and, if the Madrissa be thought inadequate to the due diffusion of 
Mahommedan literature and law, one in the Western provinces would, I should 
imagine, amply supply the want. 

But in fact I should doubt, whether any increase in the number of Govern- 
ment establishments is necessary for these purposes : and the first thing there- 
fore is, I think, to improve those that exist by the introduction of European 
science. 

I do not imagine there will be any difficulty in doing so, if a fit instructor is 
provided, and proper books supplied. Among the inhabitants of Calcutta at least 
there seems to be an eagerness for the boon. 

The encouragement of Government will also, I believe, readily induce natives to 
acquire the English language so as to qualify themselves to become translators 
and teachers. 

As to instruction in the English language, it is not easy to fix the limits, to 
Vhich it should be attempted. Community of language seems to be the surest 



Note by Holt Mackenzie 



61 



means, perhaps the only sure means, of creating community of ideas, and I H. Mackenzie' 
confess that I am disposed to think the difficulties of the attempt are generally ttofc- confd. 
overrated. Persian, it should be recollected, is essentially a foreign language. 
It may be doubted whether what is recorded in that tongue is much better un- 
derstood by the generality of the parties interested, than it would be if recorded 
in English. 

To one party at least the record in English would be an essential gain, the 
European officer who has to decide the case. 

Possibly in the Suburbs Court, a change might be expediently attempted. 
It would scarcely be consistent to make any effort at general instiuction in Eng- 
lish, unless the gradual introduction of it as the official language of the countiy 
were contemplated. 

The question, however, like eveiy one connected with the subject of educa- 
tion is one full of difficulty. I do not presume to offer anything except as hints, on 
which my own mind is quite unsettled. The necessity of appointing a general 
Committee of public instruction, who may prepare some well digested scheme, 
embracing all the different institutions supported, or encouraged by Government, 
and to whom the various suggestions submitted by individuals may be referred 
for consideration and rcpoit, has been recognized by Government. ^ 

It sc(ms clear that in no other ^ay can any cemprehensive plan be fiamed, 
or systematically pursued: and the geneial piice applicable to the purpose 
economically nnel efficiently appropriated. Various detached committees, ill 
informed of each other's projects, must necessarily waste much labour. They will 
also probably waste much money from the want of combination. 

I have already stated generally the sentiments, with which it seems to me 
necessary that such a committee should undertake the duty. Government will 
have little difficulty in selecting individuals influenced by such sentiments and 
there arc many, who add all other necessary qualifications. The v selection 
should, I think, be made with reference to the individual, not (at least not 
solely) to the office. 

On the appointment of a general Committee of Education, it will probably 
be thought right to modify in some degree the constitution of the Committees 
charged with the immediate management of the several institutions. They will 
all of course act, under the directions of the general committee, furnishing to 
them particular reports of their operations, and submitting through them any 
suggestions they may see fit to offer for the improvement or wider diffusion of 
education. For the seminaries at the Presidency indeed it may be unnecessary 
to maintain separate committees. They will perhaps best be managed by the 
general committee, either collectively or by certain members specially selected 
by them, for the management with separate secretaries fox the Musulman and 



Selections fro?n Educational Records 



H. Mackenzie's Hindoo colleges to superintend the details of their internal arrangement to 
note — contd. control and guide the masters. Without neglecting the consideration due to 

particular endowments, the General Committee mil of course regard all the 
funds devoted to purposes of education as forming in a certain sense a common 
stock : more essentially in whatever regards the preparation or publication of 
useful works. In some of these even the Hindoos and Musulmans may eventually 
be found to have a common interest, though at first these must necessarily 
constitute two great divisions, requiring distinct consideration. 

It will naturally belong to a committee of public instruction, to ascertain 
from the different local authorities what funds have been assigned by pious, 
or philanthropic individuals, for the purpose of supporting seminaries of edu- 
cation: how far the objects of such endowments may have been fulfilled, what 
means should be taken for securing them, and what modifications in the plans 
originally contemplated by the founders may be legitimately adopted to meet 
the altered circumstances of present times. 

They cannot of course exercise any authority over private schools, but their 
advice and encouragement to individuals, Native and European, who may be 
engaged in the management, or support of such establishments, will be vfery 
valuable and probably very highly valued. 

Their direct interposition may, indeed, in some cases be sought by indivi- 
duals, for the security and improvement of funds about to be devoted to 
purposes of public education. 

In framing any rational scheme of public instruction, we must necessarily 
consider in a general way, at least, how far our other institutions are suited to 
the state of tilings, which the diffusion of knowledge may be expected ultimately 
to produce, and more immediately, how the acquirements of the students at 
the public seminaries can best be rendered subservient to the public service, 
and how the constitution of public offices and the distribution of employments can 
be made — the means of exeiting to study and rewarding merit. To those points, 
therefore, the attention of the committee will be particularly directed : and I 
should, with some confidence, anticipate from their labours, a great accession, 
within a moderate time, to the number of persons, who can now be looked to as 
good instruments of civil government, of which the details must, I apprehend, 
though our service were multiplied tenfold, be left to the natives of the 
countay. 

The several suggestions of a general nature, embraced by the report recently 
received from the Madrissa Committee, will of course obtain early and particular 
notice. The plan of the new College which it is proposed to construct in 
Hastings' Place must be framed with advertence to any charge, or addition likely 
soon to be made on the scheme of instruction or discipline. 



4 



Note htj Holt Mackenzie 63 

So aKo the Hindoo College, of which a plan and estimate prepared by Lieut- H* Mackenzie's 
enaut Buxton is still with the Military Board (the orders in regard to il having "ofc— could, 
been postponed, until the new square in the centre of the city should be cleared), ^ 
must 1 imagine undergo wine changes under the resolution of Government to 
introduce Emopcan Huence even though the general scheme of Sanscrit instruc- 
tion, Miggcstcd by the Committee should Mill be approved : a point which may 
be considered open for discussion with the general Committee. 

The decision of Government on the proposition of the load Agents at Agra 
relative to the appropriation of that portion of the produce of the late Uungd- 
dhur Pundit* s lands, which has been sot a^idc for public purposes has hitherto 
been postponed under the desire of combining any arrangements that might bo 
adopted in pursuance of them with some general systematic scheme for the 
promotion of public instruction. 

To the general Committee about to be appointed, tho subject will of course 
be referred, and I will not anticipate their judgment by any remarks on tho plan 
suggested by tho local Agents. 

It remains for me to state the immediate object of this note, which I should 
have explained at once and very briefly, had I not been unconsciously led into 
detail by the anxiety I feel for the success of a cause 1 am little able to promote* 

To the efficiency of any committee such as it is proposed to establish, it 
appears to be very essentia], that tho person through whom their correspondence 
with Government is conducted should bo one fully qualified to second their 
efforts with sufficient leisure, to devote a considerable portion of time to the 
important and difficult subject ; and with the land of knowledge that may qualify 
him to supply Government with minute and accurate information on tho points 
submitted to its judgment, 

I know not how the Madri^a and Hindoo Colleges got into tho Revenue 
Department; excepting, what would justify the absorption of all other depart- 
ments that they thence drew tho funds assigned for their support. Whilst 
however the Revenue was united to tho Judicial Department, there was perhaps 
little to object, excepting the load of business that then fell on tho secretary: 
for certainly nothing can bo more nearly connected with tho good administration 
of jufrlico and the prevention of crime, than the public instruction of the people. 
Kow, however, no Mich reason exists for continuing tho colleges in the Territorial 
Department. The funds will not bo tho less safe, that their appropriation h 
controuled elsewhere. Tho habits, which tho office necessarily induces, the 
constant occupation, official and demi-official, which its business gives aro all 
adverse to those pursuits which should belong to tho Secretary, through whom 
the decisions of Government on questions of public oducation, should pass. 



66 Selections from Educational Records 

A. D. Campbell's quently in such cases the merest smattering of an education is obtained : where 
report, 1823 — parents can afiord it, and take a lively interest in the culture of their children's 
confcd. minds, they not unfrequently continue at school as long as M or 15 years. 

8. The internal routine of duty for each day will be found, with very few 
exceptions and little variation, the same in all the schools. The hour generally for 
opening school is six o'clock, the first child that enters has the name of Saraswattee, 
or the goddess of learning, written upon the palm of his hand as a sign of 
honour ; and on the hand of the second a cypher is written, to show that he is 
worthy neither of praise nor censure ; the third scholar receives a gontle stripe ; 
the fourth two ; and every succeeding scholar that comes an additional one. 
This custom, as well as the punishment in native schools, seems of a severe kind* 
The idle scholar is flogged and often suspended by both hands and a pulley to 
the roof, or obliged to kneel down and rise incessantly, which is a most painful 
and fatiguing, but perhaps a healthy mode of punishment* 

9. When the whole are assembled, the scholars, according to their number 
and attainments, are divided into several classes, the lower ones of which are 
partly under the care of monitors, whilst the higher ones are more immediately 
under the superintendence of the master, who at the same time has his eye upon 
the whole school. The number of classes is generally four, and a scholar rises from 
one to the other according to his capacity and progress. The first business of a 
child on entering school is to obtain a knowledge of the letters, which ho learns 
by writing them with his finger on the ground in sand, and not by pronouncing 
the alphabet, as among European nations. When he becomes pretty dexterous in 
writing with his finger in sand, he has then the privilege of writing either with 
an iron style on cadjan leaves, or with a reed on paper, and sometimes on the 
leaves of the Aristolochia Indica, or with a kind of pencil on the Hulligi or 
Kadala, which answers the purpose of slates. The two latter in these districts are 
the most common. One of these is a common oblong board, about a foot in width 
and three feet in length ; this board when planed smooth has only to be smeared 
with a little rice and pulverized charcoal, and it is then fit for use. The other is 
made of cloth, first stiffened with rice water, doubled into folds resembling a book, 
and it is then covered with a composition of charcoal and several gums. The 
writing on either of these may be effaced by a wet cloth, .the pencil used is called 
Bultapa, a kind of white clay substance, somewhat resembling a crayon, with 
the exception of being rather harder. 

10. Having attained a thorough knoAvledge of the letters, the scholar next 
learns to mite the compounds, or the manner of embodying the symbols of the 
vowels in the consonants and the formation of syllables, etc., then the names 
of men, villages, animals, etc., and lastly arithmetical. signs. He then commits 
to memory an addition table and -counts from one to 100 ; he afterwards writes 



J 



Letter* 'from A. D. Campbell 



or 



easy sums in addition and subtraction of money, multiplication and the reduc- A. D. CampheWs 
tion of money, measure, etc. Here great pains are taken with the scholar in report, 1823 — 
teaching him the fractions of an integer, which descend, not by tens as in our contd. 
decimal fractions, but by fours, and are carried to a great extent. In order that 
these fractions together with the arithmetical tables in addition, multiplication 
and the threefold measures of capacity, weight and extent, may be rendered 
quite familiar to the minds of the scholars, they are made to stand up twice a day 
in rows, and repeat tlie whole after one of the monitors. 

11. The other parts of native education consist in decyphering various kinds of 
handwriting- in public, and other letters which the school-master collects from 
different sources, writing common letters, drawing up formg of agreement, reading 
fables and legendary tables, and committing various kinds of poetry to memory, 
chiefly with a view to attain distinctness and clearness of pronunciation, together 
with readiness and correctness in reading any land of composition. 

12. The three books which are most common in all the schools, and which &re 
used indiscriminately by the several castes, are the Ramayanum, Maha Bhar^ta 
and Bhagavata ; but the children of manufacturing class of people have, in addi- 
tion to the above, books peculiar to their own religious tenets, such as the 
Nagalingayna, Kutha Vishvakurma, Poorana, Kamaleskerra Ralikamahata ; and 
those who wear the lingum, such as the Buwapoorana Raghavan-kunkanya, 
Keeruja Gullana, Unabhavamoorta, Clienna Busavaswara Poorana, Jurtfa- 
gooloo, etc., which ar£ all considered sacred, and are studied with a view of subserv- 
ing their several religious creeds. 

13. The lighter kind oh stories, which are Tead for amusement, are generally 
the Punchatantra JJhatalapunchavunsatee, Punklee-soopooktahuller, Mahanta- 
rungenee. The books on the principles of the vernacular languages themselves, 
are the several dictionaries and grammars, such as the Nighantoo. Umara, 
Suddamumburee, Shuddeemanee, Durpana, Vyacurna, Andradeepeca, Andrana- 
masangraha, etc., etc., but these last and similar books which are most essential, 
and without which no accurate or extensive knowledge of the vernacular langu- 
ages can be attained, are, from the high price of manuscripts and the general 
poverty of the masters, of all the books the most uncommon in the native schools, 
and such of them as are found there, are, in consequence of the ignorance, care- 
lessness and indolence of copyists in general, full of blunders, and in every way 
most incorrect and ijnperfect. 

14. The whole of the books, however^in the Teloogoo and Carnataca schools, 
which are by far the most numerous in this district, whether they treat of 
religion, * amusement or the principles of these languages, are in verse, and hi a 
dialect quite distinct from that of conversation and business. The alphabets of 
the two dialects arc the same, and he who reads the one can read, but not 



i 



68 Selections from Educational Records 

A* D> Campbell's understand, the other also. The natives, therefore, read theso (to them un- 
report, 1823 — intelligible) books to acquire the power of reading letters in the common dialect of 
concld. business ; but the poetical is quite different from the prose dialect which they 

speak and write : and though they read these books, it is to the pronunciation of 
the syllables, not to the meaning or construction of the w T ords, that they attend. 
Indeed few teachers can explain, and still fewer scholars understand, the purport of 
the numerous books which they ihus leam to repeat from memory* Every school- 
boy can repeat verbatim a vast number of verses, of the meaning of which he 
knows no more than the parrot that has been taught to utter certain words. 
Accordingly from studies in which he has spent many a day of laborious but 
fruitless toil, the native scholar gains no improvement, except the exercise of 
memory and the power to read and write on the common business of life ; he 
makes no addition to his stock of useful knowledge, and requires no moral 
impressions. He has spent his youth in reading syllables, not words, and on 
entering into life, he meets with hundreds and thousands of words in common 
course of reading books, of the meaning of which he cannot form even the most 
distant conjecture ; and as to the declension of a noun, or the conjugation of a 
verb, he knows no more than of the most abstruse problem in Euclid. It is not 
to be wondered at, with such an imperfect education, that in writing a common 
letter to their friends, orthographical errors and other violations of grammar 
may be met with in almost every line written by a native. 

15. The Government could not promote the improved education of their 
native subjects in these districts more than by patronizing versions, in the com- 
mon prose and spoken dialect, of the most moral parts of their popular poets and 
elementary works, now committed to memory in unintelligible verse. He who 
could read, would then understand what he reads, which is far from the case at 
present. I am acquainted with many persons capable of executing such a task; 
and in the Telocgoo language would gladly superintend it as far as in my power at 
this distance from the Presidency, 

16. The economy with which children are taught .to write in the native 
schools, and the system by which the most advanced scholars are caused to 
teach the Icfs advanced, and at the same time to confirm their own knowledge, 
is certainly admhable, and well deseives the imitation it has received in 
England * Ihe chief defects in the native schools are the nature of the books arid 
learning taught and the want of competent masters. 

Jf: * # * * 

A. D. CAMPBELL, 

Collector. 

* See p. 23, 

■ 

t 



* 



Committee of Public Instruction 69 

(19) Letter, dated September 1823, from ilie Secretary, Committee of Public 

Instruction, to local Agents. 

Gentlemen, 

I am desired hy the General Committee of Public Instruction appointed Letter to local 
by the Governor General in Council on the 31sfc ultimo, to bring to your knowledge, Agents, Sept. 
their having been nominated to ascertain the state of public education under this 1^23. 
Presidency and to submit from time to time the suggestion of such measures, as 
it may appear expedient to adopt, with a view to the better instruction of the 
people, to the introduction of useful knowledge, including the sciences and arts 
of Europe, and the improvement of their moral character. 

To enable the Committee to fulfil the objects of its nomination, it will be 
necessary for them to be apprised of the local means, that are applicable to the 
purposes of public instruction, throughout the country and the existence of any 
peculiar circumstances, favourable or unfavourable to its dissemination. You 
are, therefore, requested to furnish the Committee with replies to the following 
questions as far as the information you possess, or may be able to collect, within 
the limits of your local agency, will permit. 

1. What schools, colleges or seminaries of any denomination, whether public 
or private, exist in the towns or villages of the district ? 

2. What instruction is proposed to be given at them and in what lan- 
guages ? 

3. What are the books or materials hy which such instruction is given ? 

4. To what description or class of persons do the teachers respectively 
belong ? 

5* How are the teachers paid and to what amount monthly or annually ? 

G. If by public grants or endowments, what are the nature and circum- 
stance of each grant, such as the rate or period of the original grant, by whom 
and to whom given, to what purpose the grant was made, whether in land or 
money, and to what annual amount, how it is secured and administered ? 

7< In what degree may the several schools, colleges or other establishments 
seem to merit the aid and encouragement of Government, and in what manner 
could it be best afforded ? 

8. Are the schools, colleges or other seminaries well or ill attended ? 

9. At what age do the pupils usually join the establishment and when do 
they quit it ? 



70 Selections from Educational Records 

10. Where the pupils are resident under the roof (of) the master^ or in a 
public building, what are the arrangements for their food, clothing, etc. ? 

<+ 

1L What success seems to attend the instruction given ? And what books, 
especially among such as have been published by the Calcutta School Book 
Society, or any other subsisting institution, appear to be most required for the 
intellectual and moral improvement of the pupils 1 

In requesting answers to these queries, the Committee by no means wish 
you to understand, that full replies are expected to each. They are aware of 
the real difficulties, that will close the access to information, in some instances, 
and that many impediments may arise from feelings of personal interest and 
excusable prejudice. They neither- wish to alarm the one nor contend with the 
other. They only propose collecting as many facts as circumstances may admit, 
relative to the actual state of public education and the capabilities of the 
country to contribute towards its own amelioration. You will not therefore, 
if you should find it difficult to answer the above queries as entirely as 3*ou would 
wish, withhold such information as you may be able to communicate* The Com- 
mittee will also be happy to receive any suggestions that may occur to you 
generally, as calculated to promote the diffusion of useful education throughout 
the country, as well as a free communication of your sentiments, regarding 
the expedience and practicability of introducing an acquaintance with European 
Science and Literature, either through the medium of the English or -the 
native languages* 

You are requested to communicate with the local magistrate on the subject 
of this letter, of which a copy may be furnished to him, if he should desire it, 
and the Committee have, no doubt that in common with every other Public 
officer or individual, whom you may wish to co-operate with you in the im- 
portant and interesting objects of this address, that officer will readily afford 
you every assistance and information, it may be more especially in his power to 
contribute. 

As some time must elapse, before you can be enabled to answer many of 
the enquiries, contained in this letter, and the Committee are desirous of being 
informed as soon as possible, of any ascertained endowments or Funds of a public 
nature, which may have become known to the Local Agents appointed under 
Regulation XIX, 1810, in pursuance of that Regulation and may be immediately 
applicable to any object of Public Education, you are requested to furnish as 
soon as possible, a statement of any, such endowments or Funds, within the limits 
of your Local Agency - dr&wn up in such form as may have been adopted for 
official communication to the Board of Revenue, and accompanied by full report 



Letter to local 
Agents, Sept. 
1823— contd. 



Committee of Public Instruction 



of such particulars relative to the receipts or disbursements, as may appear Letter to local 

requisite for the Committee's information. Agents, Sept. 

1823—cohcld. 

I have the honour to be, etc., 

(Sd.) II. IL WILSON, 
Junior Member and Secretary to the 

Committee of Public Instruction. 

Calcutta : 
September, 1S23. 



(20) Resolution, fated the 17th January 1S24. 

The Governor General in Council having fully considered the above report of Resolution ro 
the General Committee of public instruction, resolves, on the grounds therein funds at the 
Mated, that, of the institutions specified in the list submitted by them, the Committee's 
following alone shall form a charge on the lac of Rupees appropriated to the "'*/ ,oraf t * l 
object of public education by the Resolution of the 17th July last, viz. :— January 1S~J. 

lis. 

Sctiooh nt Chln«ura!i [QfiW 

Sch<v>l* nt lUjpootnrta , 3*G00 

School nt ISliiugulporo li.GOO 

Total [ . 10,800 



So long therefore as those institutions shall be maintained, the annual 
income at the disposal of the Committee of Instruction, under the Resolution of 
the I7thJuIy last, will be Sicca Rupees 83,200. Should they bo discontinued or 
reduced, the Amount available to the Committee for otlter purposes will bo pro- 
portionately increased; and of course the fund in question is to he charged with 
any disbursements made on account of these or other existing institutions 
beyond the amount assigned to them. 

3. His Lordship in Council is further pleased to pass the following resolutions 
for the purpose of better defining the extent of the funds to be administered by 
thn Committee and the mode in which thev arc to be drawn for, 

4. The order passed in 1819, under which the incomo of the Madrinsah was 
fixed at Sicca Rupees 30,000 per annum, shall be considered to have had effect 
from the commencement of the year 1819-20. Prom that date, up to which 

i,2 



72 Selections from Educational Records 

The Committee's the accounts of the Institution are to be considered as finally adjusted, a 
funds — contd. regular statement of the assigned income and charges will be prepared for each 

year, the Madrissah being annually credited with the above sum (Sicca Rupees 
30,000) and debited with the expenses incurred, r and the balance due to the In- 
stitution on the 30th April last will be placed at the disposal of the Committee. 
For the current year a monthly sum of Rs. 2,500 will be similarly carried to the 
credit of the Madrissa, and the Committee will be authorized to draw the 
amount monthly with any balance that may be due on account of the past 
months without further reference to Government, So likewise hereafter the Sub- 
Treasurer will monthly carry the sum of Rs. 2,500 to the credit of the Com- 
mittee on account of the Madrissah ; the amount will be drawn by the Secretary 
in bills on the Sub-Treasurer counf ersigned by two or more of the Committee. 

5. The income assigned to the Hindoo College of Calcutta (Sicca Rs. 25,000) 
by the resolution of the 21st August, 1821, shall be considered to have commenced 
from that date, and the above resolutions, relative to the Madrissah funds shall 
be applied {mutatis mutandis) to the Hindoo College. 

6. The years 1821-22 and 1822-23 having equally yielded a considerable sur- 
plus revenue ; and it being obviously desirable that the Committee of Instruc- 
tion should possess at starting a considerable fund for tEe construction of build- 
ings, the purchase of books and instruments and the like, that they may not 
be stinted in the means of giving the fullest possible efficiency to existing 
institutions, at the earliest practicable period, — His Lordship in Council resolves 
that the assignment of the lac of rupees shall take effect from the year first 
mentioned : _and that for each . of the years 1821-22 and 1822-23 the sum of 
Rs. 83,200 shall be carried to the credit of the Committee of Instruction : A 
like sum in equal monthly instalments will be carried to their credit in the 
current year ; to be drawn for as above prescribed in regard to, the funds of 
the Madrissah. 

7. In placing the above mentioned funds at the disposal of the Committee, 
His Lordship in Council is satisfied that while they pursue with animation and 
liberality the important objects to which their labours are directed, they will not 
the less anxiously endeavour to maintain every practicable economy. 

8. In fixed establishments all charges that may appear expedient will of course 
be reported to Government. Whether any and what restriction shall be imposed, 
or the discretion of the Committee in regard to the appropriation of the sums placed 

- at their disposal, beyond what may be implied in the requisition of regular accounts, 
will be considered in the Persian Department : It is of course quite unnecessary 
that they should monthly apply for the sanction of Government to the ordinary 
expenses of the institutions under their superintendence or to contingent charges 
of an amount not exceeding 1,000 rupees. 



Minute hy Sir T. Mttnro 



73 



(27) Minute, dated the 10th March, 1826, by Sir Thomas Mvnro* 

The Board of Revenue were directed by Government on the 2nd July, 1822, Minnie by Sir 
to ascertain the number of schools, and the state of education among the natives T. Mitnro, 
in the provinces, and with their letter of the 21st February last, they transmitted 1S26. 
the reports on this subject which they had received from the several Collectors. 
From these reports it appears that the number of schools, and of what are called 
colleges, in the territories under this Presidency, amount to 12,498, and the popu- 
lation to 12,850,941 ; so that there is one school to every 1,000 of the population ; 
but as only a very few females are taught in school, we may reckon one school to 
every 500 of the population. 

2. It is remarked by the Board of Revenue, that of a population of 12 J millions 
there are only 188,000 or 1 in G7 receiving education. This is true of the whole 
population, but not as regards the male part of it, of which the proportion educated 
is much greater than is here estimated ; for if we take the whole population as stated 
in the Teport at 12,800,000 and deduct one-half for females, the remaining male 
population will be 0,425,000 ; and if we reckon the male population between the 
ages of five and ten years, which is the period which boys in general remain at school, 
at one-ninth, it will give 713,000 which is the number of boys that would be at 
school if all the males above ten years of age were educated ; but the number act- 
ually attending the school is only 184,110, or little more than one-fourth of that 
number. I have taken the interval between five and ten years of age as the term 
of education, because, though many boys continue at school till twelve or fourteen, 
many leave it under ten, I am, however, inclined to estimate the portion of the 
male population who receive school education to be nearer to one-third than one- 
fourth of the whole, because we have no returns from the provinces of the number 
taught at home. In Madras the number taught at home is 2G,903, or above five 
times greater than that taught in the schools. There is -probably some error in 
this number, and though the number privately taught in the provinces does cer- 
tainly not approach this rate, it is no doubt considerable, because the practice of 
boys being taught at home by their relations or private teachers is not unfrequent 
in any part of the country. The proportion educated is very different h\ different 
classes ; in some it is nearly the whole ; in others it is hardly one- tenth. 

3. The state of education here exhibited, low as it is compared with that of 
our own country, is higher than it was in most European countries at no very distant 
period. It has, no doubt, been better in earlier times ; but for the last century, 
it does not appear to have undergone any other change than what arose from the 
number of schools diminishing in one place and increasing in another, in consequence 



* Printed in Evidence of W2 f App* I f No. 18 [3G8/50G] and in Madrm Sthclions, ii, 2SS5, p. XX. 



74 Selections from Educational Records 

Minute by Sir T. of the shifting of the population, from war or other causes. The great number 

nro — contd, of schools has been supposed to contribute to the keeping education in a low state, 

because it docs not give a sufficient number of scholars to secure the services of able 
teachers. The monthly rate paid by each scholar is from four to six or eight annas. 
Teachers in general do not earn more than six or seven rupees monthly, which is 
not an allowance sufficient to induce men properly qualified to follow the profes- 
sion* It may also be said that the general ignorance of the teachers themselves 
is one cause why none of them draw a large body of scholars together ; but the 
main causes of the low state of education are the little encouragement which it 
receives, from there being but little demand for it, and the poverty of the people. 

4. These difficulties may be gradually surmounted. The hindrance which is 
given to education by the poverty of the people may in a great degree be removed 
by the endowment of schools throughout the country by Government, and the want 
of encouragement will be remedied by good education being rendered more easy 
and general, and by the preference which will natmaUy be given to well educated 
men in all public offices.- No progress, however, can be made without a body of 
better instructed teachers than we have at present ; but such a body cannot be 
had without an income sufficient to afford a comfortable livelihood to each indivi- 
dual belonging to it. A moderate allowance should therefore be secured to them 
by Government, sufficient to place them above want ; the rest should be derived 
from their own industry. If the} r are superior both in knowledge and diligence to 
the common village school-masters, scholars will flock to them and augment their 
income. 

5. What is first wanted, therefore, is a school for educating teachers, as pro- 
posed by the Committee of Madras School Book Society, in the letter of the 25th 
October, 1824, which accompanied their second report. I think that they should 
be - authorized to draw 700 rupees monthly from the Treasury for the purposes 
which they have stated ; namely, for the payment of the interest of money em- 
ployed in building and the salaries of teachers, 500 ; and for the expenses of the 
press, 200. I would next propose that Government should establish, in each Col- 
lectorate, two principal schools, one for Hindoos and the other for Mahomedans ; 
and that hereafter, as teachers can -be found, the Hindoo schools might be aug- 
mented so as to give one to each Tahsildary, or about 15 to each Collcctorate. We 
ought to axtend to our Mahomedan the same advantages of education as to our 
Hindoo subjects, and perhaps even in a greater degree, because a greater propor- 
tion of them belong to the middle and higher classes. But as their number is not 
more than one-twentieth of that of the Hindoos, it will not be necessary to give 
more than one Mahomedan school to each Collcctorate, except in Arcot, and a few 
otlzer Collectorates, where the Mahomedan population is considerably above the 
usual standard. 



Minute by Sir T. Mxtnro • 75 

0, We have 20 Collectoratcs* Tlic number of Tahsildaries is liable to change, Minute by Sir T. 
but it will be sufficient for the present purpose to estimate them at 15 on an average Mvnro— ;_contd. 
to onch Collect orate, or 300 in all. This would, according to the plan proposed,, 
give about 40 Collectorate and 300 Talisildary schools. The monthly salaries of 
the teachers of the Collectorate schools might, on an average, be 15 rupees to each, 
and those of the Tahsildary nine rupees each. These allowances may appear small 
but the Tahsildary school-master who receives nine rupees monthly from Govern- 
ment, will get at least as much more from his scholars, and considering all circum- 
stances his station will probably be better than that of a parish school-master in 



Scotland. 

7. The total expense of the schools will be as follows : — 

IK 

Madras School Book Society, per month * 700 

CoIIectoralc Schools Mnhomedan*, 20 at IK 15 , 300 

Collectorate schools Hindoos 20 nt IK 15 300 

TahsilcUry tchooK 300 tit IK 9 2,700 



Total rEit moxtii * 4,000 



Total vztl annum * 48,000 



This expense will be incurred only by degrees, because it will be long before 
a sufficient number of qualified teachers can be obtained. The charges for the 
Madras School Book Society and the Collectorate schools, arc all thai will probably 
be wanted before the sanction of the Honourable Court can be received. The sum 
for which we ought to request their sanction ought not to be less than half a lac of 
rupees. None of the endowments in the Collector's reports arc applicable to the 
present object* They do not exceed 20,000 rupees in all and only a small portion 
of them are public grants, and this small portion belongs chiefly to the teachers of 
Theology, Law and Astronomy. Whatever expense Government may incur in the 
education of the people, will be amply repaid by the improvement of the country ; 
for the general diffusion of knowledge is inseparably followed by more orderly 
habits, by increasing industry, by a taste for the comforts of life, by exertion to 
acquire them, and by the growing prosperity of the people. 

8. It will be advisable to appoint a Committee of Public Instruction, in order 
to superintend the establishing of the public schools; to fix on the places most 
proper for them, and the books to be used in them ; to ascertain in what manner 
the instruction of the natives may be best promoted, and to report to Government 
the result of their enquiries on this important subject 

0, We must not be too sanguine in expecting any sudden benefit from the 
labours of the School Book Society. Their disposition to promote the instruction 



* 



76 Selections from Educational Records 

Minute by Sir T* of the people by educating teachers, will not extend it to more individuals than now 
Munro — concld. attend the schools ; it can be extended only by means of an increased demand for 

it, and this must arise chiefly from its being found to facilitate the acquisition of 
wealth or rank, and from the improvement in the condition of the people rendering 
a larger portion of them more able to pay for it. But though they cannot educate 
those who do not seek, or cannot pay for education, they can, by an improved 
system, give a better education to those who do receive it ; and by creating and 
encouraging a taste for knowledge, they will indirectly contribute to extend it. If 
we resolve to educate the people, if we persevere in our design, and if we do not limit 
the schools to Tahsildaries, but increase their number so as to allow them for smaller ■ 
districts, I am confident that success will ultimately attend our endeavours. But, 
at the same time, I entirely concur in the opinion expressed in the 5th report of 
the Calcutta School Book Society, when speaking of the progress of the system, 
that " its operation must therefore of necessity be slow ; years must elapse before 
the rising generation will exhibit any visible improvement." 

THOMAS MUNRO, 



CHAPTER y. 

TllE BEGINNINGS OF ENGLISH EDUCATION. 

The authorities began by patronising the ancient form of learning. 
They then awoke to the illiteracy of the masses, set forth enthusiasti- 
cally to establish common schools and then recoiled at the magnitude 
of the task. But they did not return to the encouragement of Sanskrit 
and Arabic lore — although these forms of education were not abandoned 
without a struggle. The same year (1823) which witnessed the commence- 
ment of surveys and plans of mass education witnessed also a decisive 
step in the policy upon which the more enlightened servants of the Com- 
pany, despairing of the attempt to diffuse vernacular instruction, were 
now to embark. The controversy between the Orientalists and the 
Anglicists had in reality already begun and it only remained for the 
views of the latter to assert themselves in a practical manner. 

The earliest and the most extreme supporter of the Anglicist view was 
C'liarles C4rant,* the friend of Wilberforcc. With some hesitation I quote, 
as document No. 22, an extract from his " Observations " written in or 
about 1792. His proposals go far beyond anything urged by Macaulay 
or subsequently adopted. 

Grant's proposals seem t > have had little practical effect. Perhaps 
they were recognised as violent and impracticable. But an uneasy 
feeling began to assert itself, and the possibility of spreading a more 
useful and effective type of education began to be considered. Lord 
Moira's Minute of 1815 (document No. 9) emphasised the necessity not 
only of multiplying schools but also of inculcating more accurate ideas 
of general science and sounder principles of morality. Tic also 'criticised 
the type of education given in the " University of Benares," as he termed 
the Sanskrit College there. 



* For previous refcroncei to Qrnnti seo chaptor II, p. 10. 

.< " )J 



78 



Selections from Educational Records 



4 



Nor was this tendency confined to officials. Indeed, it developed a 
stronger impetus among the Bengalis, which was aided by the missionaries 
and private individuals. In 1817 the Yidyalaya or Anglo-Indian College* 
was founded at Calcutta — " the very first English seminary in Bengal, 
or even in India, as far as I know," wrote Dr. Dun\f The majority 
of members on the joint Committee which managed it were Indians. 
The institution was mismanaged and most of the Europeans left the 
committee. Mainly on the initiative of David Hare, who had made 
increasing efforts to keep the school together, an application was made 
to Government to save it from ruin. Government was willing to help but 
stipulated for a small measure of control, which the Indian majority 
were unwilling to accord. At last the claim of Government (which 
amounted only to the appointment of a visitor) was recognised. J In 
1855 the institution became absorbed in the Presidency College of 
Calcutta. There were also the Baptist Mission College at Serampore 
and Bishop's College, Calcutta, founded respectively in 1818 and 1820. 

Bombay showed that practical bent which distinguishes its citizens. 
An engineering institution had been founded there and was maintained 
wholly at Government expense. In 1824 it contained 36 Indians and 
14 lads of mixed descent. By 1826 the numbers had increased to 86. 
There were also medical schools* at Calcutta and Bombay, the latter 
founded in 1826. 



* Originally called tho '* Maha Patshala, or Hindoo College of Calcutta.** 

f Dr. DufFs account of the foundation and early days df this school is worth perusal. It is 
quoted in Howell, page 10, See also The Itevd. Dr. Ditfp$ letters addressed to Lord Avclland on tJte 
subject of Native Education, IS 11 ; and the Seeond Report from the Select Committee of the House 
of Lords, 1852-3, Minutes of Evidence, page* 43, No. GOOSf- A good account of the Hindu College is 
also given in J. Knnit's Review of Public Instruction in the Bengal Presidency from 1S35 to 1851, 
pp. 1-43, 

% See letters, dated 1st July 1824 and 15th October 1S24, from the managers of the Institution, 
and from the General Committee to Government. The Indian Managers of the Vidyalaya pro- 
posed a joint committee on which the General Committee reported as follows : — 

'* Wo received a proposal to {place the college under the control of a special committee 

to consist of an equal number of tho General Committee and of the Native Managers, with this 
condition that no measure should be adopted to^whieh the native members of tho Committee should 

unanimously object We thought it advisable to decline acceptance of tho authority thus 

offered to us, but we deemed it expedient to propose taking a share in the control of the institution 

as visitors of the college." (Political proceeding*, 1829, vol, G, No. 80.) 



* 



begin ni tiff of English Education 70 

Thus there existed side by side two classes of education— that im- 
n parted in[the indigenous pathsbafas and tote and in places like the Calcutta 
Madrassa and the Sanskrit College at Benares; and that imparted in 
primary schools managed by missions and societies and in institutions 
which contained the germs of the later English high school and Arts 
college. The two systems went on peacefully side by side. An effort 
on the part of Government brought them into collision in Bengal. 

In 1S11 Government had promised to establish colleges for the 
advancement of Hindu literature in Nadiu and Tirhut. The scheme 
failed and Government decided to redeem its promise by the opening 
of a Hindu Sanskrit College at Calcutta after the model of that at 
Benares. The foundation stone was laid in 1821, an annual sum of - 
Bs. 30,000 was granted and a staff of fourteen pandits was appointed 
with a European Secretary and 100 scholars on the foundation. The 
original intention of this college was that it. should fulfil two functions, 
the cultivation of Hindu literature and the gradual diffusion of European 
knowledge. Such were the instructions given to the Committee of 
management in a Resolution of the 21st August 1S21. The passage 
runs as follows. 

" Th* Committee will hear in mi ml that the immediate object of the institution 
t* the cultivation of Hindu hteuiture. Yet it is in the judgment of His Lordship 
in Council, a purpose of much eh* -jut intend to .sock every practicable menus of 
effecting the gradual diffusion of Ivurojte.in know ledge. It seems indeed no unieasou- 
nblo anticipation to hope that if the higher and the educated classes among the 
Hindus tdiall, through the medium of theii mere I language, I c imbued with a taste, 
for the Kuroprnn literature ami M'ienre, general acquaintance with these and with 
the language whence they aie drawn, will he as surely and nt, extensively communi- 
cated an by any attempt at direct instruction by other umHmmblcr seminaries." 

The Committee, however, decided that in the first instance at least 
the instruction to be given should be confined to the sacred literature 
of the Hindus as it is contained in the Sanskrit language. 

On the 2Hrd July 1 823, Mr. Harington submitted to Government 
n letter he had received from the British India Society, advising the 
transmission, by permission of the Court of Directors, freight free, of 
" an extensive philosophical apparatus," to be placed at the disposal of 

M 2 



4 



80 Selections from Educational Records 

the college. The arrival of this apparatus, consisting of " a complete 
set of mechanical powers, a complete whirling table/* and many other 
strange things, probably caused consternation among the pandits and 
may have proved embarrassing to the commit tec, whose heart was not 
ill these new-fangled sciences. How over, Government charged expenses 
of unpacking, etc., to the Company and assigned a salary for a professor 
on experimental philosophy so soon as a qualified person should be found 
to receive it. On the 31st July of the same year the Governor-General 
gave some instructions to the committee, whose reply was slightly 
equivocal; they admitted that the experiments would be instructive 
as well as amusing and contented themselves with providing for a very 
small number of pupils on the science side. These communications 
are printed as documents Nos. 1C and ,23. 

The attempt to promote useful learning was not a success. Perhaps 
this is not a matter for surprise. The Directors complained of this 
failure while admitting ihat th« > view taken by the Governor-General was 
" rational " (document No. 24). The Committee of Public Instruction 
defended then* action in a letter to the Governor-General, dated the 18th 
August 1824 (document No. 25), by saying that the popular feeling was 
against this innovation and that oriental lore was excellent pabulum. 
That Bengali feeling was entirely against the introduction of western 
learning is disproved by a letter written in December 1S23 by Eaja 
Earn Mohan Boy to Lord Amherst (document No. 20). Howell remarks' 55 
on this incident, " it is one of the most unintelligible facts in the history 
of English Education in India, that at the very time when the natives 
themselves were crying out for instruction in European literature and 
science and were protesting against a continuance of the prevailing 
orientalism, a body of English gentlemen appointed to initiate a system 
of education for the country was found to insist upon the retention of 
oriental learning to the practical exclusion of European learning." 
Probably there was truth on both sides. Eaja Earn Mohan Boy, the 
founder of the Brahmo Samaj, and his enlightened followers, were doubt- 



* Education in Iirithlt India, p. IS. 



Beginning of English Education 81 

less opposed not. only by I he prudence or timidity of the Committee, 
but by a good deal of feeling among the more conservative ranks of the 
Bengalis, The Directors uiged a bold advance and were backed up, 
not very zealously, by the Goveiuor-licneral. The committee, in close 
touch with (he mujoiity of public opinion and the view of the yandiis, 
hesitated to embark on s»o large a measure of innovation. 

(22) Extract from C< Grant's* Observations on the state of society among 
the Ablatio subjects of (heat Britain, particularly with ) expect to 
month ; and on the means of impuwing it. Written chiefly ~tn the 
year 1102 : dated August 10, 1797. | 

We now proceed to tho main ohjrct of tin * \\o\\: f for the tako of winch nil Grant's" Obscrva* 
fho prcmlinp; topic** and di^cu mous have boon brought forward, — an enquiry intp/ioiis." 
tho mnaus of rcrwdyinjt dc-onlon, which havo become lints inveterate in the state 
of ^0cicty among our Asiatic Mdjjrcl% winch destroy their happiness, and obstruct 
every ^prcjoo of improvement 'among them. 

******* 

The true cure of darl no^ t K the introduction of light. The Hindoos orr, 
because they are ignorant ; and their errors have never fairly been laid before 
them- The communication of our light and knowledge to them, would prove the 
bc-L rrmody for their di^ordcr^ ; and this remedy in proposed, from a full convic- 
tion that if judiciously and patiently applied, it would havo great and happy effects 
upon them, effects honourable and advantageous for us, ^ 

There are two unya of making this communication ; the one is, by the medium Medium of 
of the languages of those countries; the other is by the medium of our own. In communication. 



# Vnxvut * G r.\vr (17(C>.|SJaj vat in 1707 *<ut to Imlu in a military capacity* In 1770 Iiq 
t( Xuni^l hnl flj-ftiri vuit out to hvbx nm\ ua»i nniln n Tatlor tin re Jn 177& UorfipnJlj jtccmnulMtxl 
a hrpo fortune run! nlnrnul to Knjjltnd in I TOO* In lh<*Z he tntuotl Purlminent nml bco\nu> 
CWr/mn of thv KiM Jmlu Comptny m lb0\ Urout i\n cnrrgdta member of tbo nvnn^elic^l 
pnrly Known nt tin* CUpImn t<*t t \\U\i\\ indmbvl Zticlnry Mactxulay, Wilberfuroe, etc* 

t In IHia UranVn '* Ob*trv Ationt, rte,/' Inbl before the JIou**» of Common*, by who/m 
ottl( it wan jmiit^L It \tat nvjnrdtsl Urn anient .timer to the arguments of thy nntMiutwion vty 
pirty huvlcl hy Mnjor Krorr Waujvo ami S\ns>,t bMixu {Diet, NnU Ilio^. VJU, tt7H). It appmru 
fn tho fttpwt frmn th? Srhct CommiUrt vf the liouit of Uvntmowt vn the affairs of the Kast India Com* 
puny, 10th August Appendix I, pp> 82-b7, 



S2 Selections from Educational Records 

Grant* $ u Ob$erva- general, when foreign teachers have proposed to instruct the inhabitants~of any 
tions" — contd. country, they have used the vernacular tongue of that people, for a natural and 

necessary reason, that they could not hope to make any other mean of communica- 
tion intelligible to them. This is not our case in respect of our eastern dependencies. 
They are our own, we have possessed them long, many Englishmen reside among 
the natives, our language is not unknown there, and it is practicable to diffuse it 
more widely. The choice therefore of either mode, lies open to us ; and we are at 
liberty to consider which is entitled to a preference. Upon this subject, it is not 
intended to pass an exclusive decision here ; the points absolutely to be contended 
for are, that we ought to impart our superior lights, and that this is practicable ; 
that it is practicable by two ways, can never be air argument why neither should be 
attempted. Indeed no great reason appears why cither should be systematically 
interdicted, since particular cases may recommend even that which is generally 
least eligible. 

The acquisition of a foreign language is, to men of cultivated minds, a matter 
of no great difficulty. English teachers could therefore be sooner qualified to offer 
instruction in the native languages, than the Indians would be prepared to receive it 
in ours. This method would hence come into operation more speedily than the 
other ; and it would also be attended with the advantage of a more careful selection 
of the matter of instruction. But it would be far more confined and less 
effectual ; it may be termed a species of deciphering. The decipherer is required 
to unfold, in intelligible words, what was before hidden?^ Upon every new occasion, 
he has a similar labour to perform, and the information obtained from him is limited 
to the single communication then made. All other writings in the same character, 
still remain, to those who are ignorant of it, unknown ; but if they are taught the 
character itself, they can at once read every writing in which it is used* Thus 
superior, in point of ultimate advantage does the employment of the English language 
appear ; and upon this ground, we give a preference to that mode, proposing hero 
that the communication of our knowledge shall be made by the medium of our 
own language. This proposition will bring at once to trial, both the principle of 
such communication, and that mode of conveyance which can alone be questioned ; 
for the admission of the principle must at least include in it the admission of the 
narrowest means suited to the end, which we conceive to be the native languages. 
The principle, however, and the mode are still distinct questions, and any opinion 
which may be entertained of the latter, cannot affect the former ; but it is hoped, 
that what shall be offered here concerning them, will be found sufficient to justify 
both. 

English, the We proceed then to observe, that it is perfectly in the power of this country, * 

medium. by degrees, to impart to the Hindoos our language ; afterwards through that 

medium, to make them acquainted with our easy literary compositions, upon a 



^ Grant's observations 83 

variety of subjects ; and, let not the idea hastily excite derision, progressively with Grant's "Observa* 
the simple elements of otir arts our philosophy and religion, Theso acquisitions coutd.J 
would silently undermine, and at length subvert, the fabric of error; and all the 
objection* that may be apprehended against Much a change, are, it is confidently 
believed, capable of a solid Answer. 

The first communication, and the instrument of introducing the rest, must be 
the English landing ; this is a key which will open to them a world of new ideas, 
and policy alone might Imvo impelled us long since, to put it into their hands. 

& # 3*: i*i s£ if: 

[Here follow an account of the introdiicf ion of Persian by the 
tfogliuls as the language of Government and an enumeration of the 
benefits which might have been derived from following Their example 
with English*] 

tf- & * Iji * * 

It would be extremely easy for Government to establish, at a moderate expense, 
in various pnrfs of the provinces, places of gratuitous instruction in reading and , 
writing Englbh : multitudes, especially of the young, would flotk to them; and 
(lie easy boohs u*cd in leaching, might at the Fame time convey obvious truths on 
different MihjecK The tenchen should bo pir>ons of knowledge, morals and 
discretion; and men of this character could impart to their pupils much useful 
infonnat mum de-course : and to facilitate the attainment of that object, they might 
at first make u^s of the Bengalee tongue. ,The Hindoos would , in time, become 
teachers of English themselves; and the employment of our language in public 
business, for which every political reason remains in full force, would, in the course 
of another generation, make it very general throughout the country. There is 
nothing wanting to the success of this plan, but the hearty patronage of Government. 
If they wish it to micceed, it can and must- succeed* The introduction of English in 
the administration of the revenue, in judicial proceedings and in other business 
of Government, wherein Persian is now used, and the establishment of free-schools 
for instruction in this language, would insure its diffusion over the country, for the 
reason already huggcitcd, that the interest of the natives would induce them to 
acquire it. Neither would much confusion arise, even at first upon audi a change : 
for there are now a great number of Portuguese and Bongalcso clerks in the provinces, 
who understand both (ho Himlostarmy and English languages. To employ them 
in drawing up petitions to Government, or its officers, would bo no additional hard- 



84 Selections from Educational "Records 

Gh-anVs "Observa- ship upon the poorer people, who are now assisted in that way by Persian clerka ; 
Hons" — contd. and the opportunity afforded to others who have sufficient leisure, of learning the 

language" of the Government gratuitously, would he an advantage never enjoyed 

under Mahomedan rulers. 

Advantages. With our language, much of our useful literature might, and would, in time 

be communicated. The art of Printing, would enable us to disseminate our writings 
in a way the Persians never could have done, though their compositions had been 
as numerous as ours. Hence the Hindus would see the great use we make of reason 
on all subjects, and in all affairs ; they also would learn to reason, they would become 
acquainted with the history of their own species, the past and present state of the 
world; their affections would gradually become interested by various engaging 
works, composed to recommend virtue, and to deter from vice ; the general mass 
of their opinions would be rectified ; and above all, they would see a better system 
of principles and morals. New views of duty as rational creatures would open 
upon them ; and that mental bondage in which they have long been holden would 
gradually dissolve. 

To this change the true knowledge of nature would contribute ; and some of 
our easy explanations of natural philosophy might, undoubtedly, by proper means, 
be made intelligible to them. Except a few Brahmins, who consider the conceal- 
ment of their learning as part of their religion,* the people are totally misled as to 
the system and phenomena of nature ; and their errors in this branch of science, 
upon which divers important conclusions rest, may be more easily demonstrated 
to them, than the absurdity and falsehood of their mythological legends. From 
the demonstration of the true cause of eclipses, the Story of Ragoorf and Ketoo, the 
dragons, who when the sun and moon are obscured are supposed to be assaulting 
them, a story which has hitherto been an article of religious faith, productive of 
religious services among the Hindoos, would fall to the ground ; the removal of 
one pillar would weaken the fabric of falsehood ; the discovery of one palpable 
error, would open the mind to farther conviction ; and the progressive discovery 
of truths, hitherto unknown, would dissipate as many superstitious chimeras, 
the parents of false fears, and false hopes. Every branch of natural philosophy 
might in time be introduced and diffused among the Hindoos. - Their understand- 
ings would then be strengthened, as well as their minds informed, and error be 
dispelled in proportion. 

Mechanical arts. But perhaps*no acquisition in natural philosophy would so effectually enlighten 

the mass of the people, as the introduction of the principles of mechanics, and their 

* ^ ^ ^ * ^ ^ 

* Grant refers, in a foot note, to certain Hindu texts which he characteristically misinterprets. 



Grant's observations 85 

application to agriculture and I ho useful art*. Not thnt t)io Hindoos aro wholly Grant's "Ohwrva 
destitute of simple mechanical contrivances. Some manufiinturcv which depend f^ms" — contd. 
upon patient attention and flolimcy of hand, are carried to a considerable* degree 
of perfection among thorn ; Hut for a series of agc^ perhaps for two thousand years, 
they do not appear to have made any considerable addition to the arts of life. Inven- 
tion *eem* wholly torpid nmonc them ; in a few things, they have improved by 
their intercourse with European**, of whose immense superiority they arc at length 
convinced ; but thh effect partial, and not discernible in the bulk of the people. 
The scope for improvement, in this respect, is prodigious. 

What great acromions of wealth would Bengal derive from n people intelligent 
in the principles of agriculture, skilled to make the most of soils and seasons, to 
improve the existing modes of culture, of pasturage, of rearing cattle, of defence 
against excess of drought, and of rain, and thus to meliorate the quality of all the 
produce of the count ry ! All these arts are stilt m infancy. The husbandman of 
Bengal just turn* up the soil with a diminutive plough* drawn by a couple of miser* 
able cattle; and if drought parches, or the rain inundate the crop, lie has no 
resource ; he think* he is destined to thi* suffering, and is far more likely to die 
from want, than to relieve himself by any new or extraordinary effort* Horti- 
culture also is in its first stage : the various fruits and esculent herbs, with which 
Hindnstan abounds, are nearly in a state of nature; though they are planted in 
inclosed gardens little skill in employed to reclaim them In this respect likewise, 
wo might communicate information of material uso to the comfort of life, and to 
the jurvention of famine* In silk, indigo, sugar, and in many other articles, what 
vant improvements might be effected by the introduction of machinery. The 
skilful application of fire, of water, and of steam, improvements which would thus 
immediately concern the interest of the common people, would awaken them from 
their torpor, mid give activity to their minds. At present it is wonderful to see how 
entirely they resign themselves to precedent ; custom is the strongest law to them. 
Following iwpliritly, seems to be instinctive with them, in small things as well as 
great The path which the first passenger has ever marked over the soft soil, 
is trodden so undeviatingly in all it* curves, by every succeeding traveller, that 
when it is perfectly b oaten, it has still only the width of a single track. 

# * * * * * 

[ Here follows a discussion on the advantages to be derived from 
the introduction of Christianity. »] 



* & * * * 



86 



Selections from Educational Records 



Grrantfs a Obscrva- It is not asserted, that such effects would be immediate or universal ; but 
tions" — concld, admitting them to be progressive, and partial only, yet how great would the change 



be, and how happy at length for the outward prosperity, and internal peace of 
society among the Hindoos ! Men would be restored to the use of their reason ; 
all the advantages of happy soil, climate, and situation, would be observed and 
improved ; the comforts and conveniences of life would be increased ; the cultiva- 
tion of the mind, and rational intercourse, valued ; the people would rise in the 
scale of human beings ; and as they found their character, their state, and their 
comforts, improved, they would prize more highly, the security and the happiness 
of a well ordered society. Such a change would correct those sad disorders which 
have been described, and for which no other remedy has been proposed, nor is in 
the nature of things to be found." 



(23) Letter, dated 6th October 1823> from tfie General Committee of Public 



which directed us to give our early attention to the completion of the arrange- 
ments, for the construction of the proposed Hindu College of Calcutta^ 

2. We were also at the same time instructed, to advert fully to any change in 
the form and distribution of the building which might be required by the change 
contemplated in the studies, and discipline of the institution, under the resolution 
of Government to introduce European Sciences as far as practicable. 

3. With reference to this latter branch of our instructions, we have further 
had recourse to the, proceedings of Government of the 17th July 1823, on occasion 
of a petition from the managers and supporters of the native Hindu College of 
Calcutta, praying for the assistance of the Government, and the resolution of 
Government thereupon. 

4. The resolution of Government determined to endow at the public charge, 
a professorship of experimental philosophy, to the lectures of which, the students 
of certain classes of the present Hindu College, as well as those of the Sanscrit College 
should be admitted gratuitously. Before finally determining on the arrangement 
however, the Governor General deemed it proper that the Committee of the Sanscrit 
Hindu College should be consulted upon the expediency of the measure, and 
requested to submit their sentiments on the details, which its adoption will involve, 
including an estimate of the expense. 



Teaching of 
science. 




* Document No. 1C, p, 50, 



4 

General Committee oj Public Instruction S7 



5, The Governor General in Council further resolved, to supply from the publio Teaching of 
* u nds, the cost of a school house to be constructed for the use of the existing Hindu science— contd. 
College and School, on a moderate scale of expense, in the vicinity of the site already 
chosen for the Sanscrit College, the plan and estimate of which, Lieutenant Buxton 
was directed to prepare, in communication with the manager of the Institution. 

G, The Committee of Superintendence of the Government Hindu College, 
having in the meantime merged into the General Committee, the reference which it 
was intended should have been made to them, lias in like manner been transferred 
to us ; and as the subjects it regards will necessarily affect the ultimate disposition 
of the buildings and site of the Sanscrit College, it is necessary that they should be 
disposed of before the completion of the arrangement affecting them bo con- 
sidered, 

7. To the measure propoj-ed by Government of so far combining the Govern- 
ment and Native Colleges, as to give them jointly the benefit of philosophical instruc- 
tion, we conceive thete cannot be any objection ; and we arc disposed to anticipate 
from the measure, advantages of the most important description, particularly as 
regards the Sanscrit College. 

8. The diffusion of sound practical knowledge amongst the able and respectable 
individuals, of whom its members will consist of men, who by their Brahmamenl 
birth, as well an by their learning, exercise a powerful influence on the minds of 
every order of the commmuty, cannot fail to be tit tended with beneficial effects* 
That the curiosity and intelligence of these individuals will be excited, we can scarcely 
doubt, when we advert to the interact, which is inherent in the subjects of the lec- 
tures, and the improved weans of verification, which they will possess in an exten- 
sive apparatus, and amusing as well as instructive experiments. The chief advant- 
ages however are, that, as the connexion will be effected in an unobtrusive manner, 
it will not be likely, in the first instance, to give any alarm to the prejudices of the 
Brah rnanical members of the college ; and as it may be expected to become attractive 
by its own merits, it is probable, that with proper regulation it will spontaneously 
ripen into intimate association* The union of European and Hindu learning being 
thus rjuictly effected in one case, it will hereafter be comparatively easy to carry 
the combination into other departments, and the improved cultivation of science, 
and literature may be thus successfully and extensively promoted* 

9. The expediency of thr* general arrangement being thus admitted, it only 
remains that the means of carrying its details into effect be suggested. There are 
some difficulties with respect to the tuition to be given and the teacher who shall 
impart it, which it is at present not easy to overcome ; and there will probably be 
an enhancement of expenditure beyond that, which was originally contemplated, 
we trust however that, in consideration of the important consequences wo have 
anticipated, the latter circumstance will not induce the Government to forego itti 

n2 



88 Selections from Educational Records \ 

Teaching of liberal intentions ; and we cntertain A no doubt that, witli time and further enquiry, 
science — contd. we shall be able to provide for the wants of the institution in the former respects. 

10. Adverting to the course of study usually adopted, and the nature of the 
apparatus actually received, we propose that the instructions to be given by the 
professor of experimental philosophy, attached to the Government and the native 
Hindu Colleges, shall embrace the following sciences ; — Mechanics, Hydrostatics, 
Pneumatics, Optics, Electricity, Astronomy, Chemistry, 

The order of the course will be determined by the^teachcr, but it would be advis- 
able to separate Chemistry from the rest, and appropriate a practical course to that 
science alone. The instructions should be given in private courses, that is to say, 
in classes, and it might be sufficient to teach Mechanics, etc., twice a week, and 
Chemistry twice a week, from 10 till 1 or 2, according to the number and proficiency 
of the pupils. During favourable periods of the year, public lectures also may 
be given on these subjects generally, or any particular brandies of them, to be held 
either in the evenings or on the days of vacation. To these lectures all the Governors, 
teachers, and scholars of the college and school should be admissible* It might 
perhaps be desirable, also to throw them open to the public at a moderate charge 
for admission ; the amount of which might constitute an additional remuneration 
to the professor. 

11. The pupils of the philosophical school are to be those of the first class of the 
present native college ; upon all of whom, it should be made obligatory to attend 
one course of philosophy, a further continuance should be made a matter of favor 
and granted only when the desire and capability of learning were undoubted. The 
duration of the period of study may then be regulated, only by the wish of the parties 
and the report of the professor. The lads of the native college should not be per- 
mitted to attend the philosophical class, until they are well grounded in the English 
language ; a qualification, it might be supposed, it is unnecessary to provide for by 
any other condition, than that of their entering the first class of the present college. 
Their number will consequently not much exceed a dozen at a time, and the pro- 
fessor will be able to extend the benefit of his instructions to at least an equal num- 
ber of the lads in the upper classes of the Sanscrit College, when he shall be qualified 
to communicate with the x>upils either in Sanscrit or some of the vernacular 
languages ; to the acquisition of which his attention should be immediately addressed 
and in the study of which he should be aided with teachers and books at the public 
expense. 

12. It is difficult at present to suggest any other arrangements for the points 
above* adverted to ; and it is possible that what is already detailed will be found 
to require essential modifications, when put in practice. What has been here stated 
may however suffice to give_an outline of what it is wished, and what it may be 
practicable in the first instance to effect. A more complete development of the 



* 



t 

General Committee of Public Instruction 



80 



system will require a communication with the person who may be appointed pro- Teaching of 
fessor, and cannot even then be finally determined, until lie shall have had the .science 1 — contd, 
benefit of reasonably protracted experience. 

13. The same difficulty is attached to any estimate of the expense ; the extent 
of which can scarcely be appreciated, in the utter absence of all experience in such 
matters in this country. In the present state of the subject therefore only 
general conclusions can be offered, with exception of the cost of the accommodation 
it might be necessary to provide, 

1*L The lectures on general physics might be hold m tho Sanscrit College, and 
tho apparatus presented by tho London Society might, as far as it at present extends, 
be disposed of in that building. It would be attended however with mhhg incon- 
venience especially if, n< expected, the apparatus bt> much enlarged, and if, as may 
he also contemplated, the Sanscrit College attract any very considerable number 
of pupils* It may also be obsi»rvrd that instruction in chemical science could 
scarcely be given in thf* Sanscrit College, as it will require a room for a laboratory 
in addition to that for the clashes ; and such a room cannot bo conveniently spared* 
As the lectures also muM be held in the hall of the College, in which the 
public examinations of the pupils are to be conducted, it is possible that tho two 
may mutually interfere and occasionally obstruct each other. It is therefore highly 
desirable that a philosophical lecture room be constructed independent of the College, 
although in its immediate vicinity. Such a building should be erected as will accom- 
modate the philosophical apparatus pecurely and comrnodtously ; comprise a labora- 
tory, in which alone Chemistry can be usefully and practically studied ; afford a 
spacious room, in which public lectures maybe given, and leave such accommodation 
to spare, as may be found available hereafter for an extension of the plan of tuition, 
should the success of the experiment rentier its extension expedient. Under these 
impressions we have obtained a plan for a .separate building, contiguous to the college, 
from Captain Buxton, the expense of erecting which will be Ks 15,998 ; according to 
the estimate of Messrs. Burn and Company of which Captain Buxton has approved* 

15, Tho chief Item of expense after the building is erected, will be the salary 
of the professor. This has been estimated at Hs. 300 a month, but it may be doubled 
whether a qualified person can bo procured for this sum, indeed it is not certain, 
that a fit person is to be met with in India on any terms, and it may bo necessary 
therefore to invite a teacher from Europe. In that ease £500 a year would be 
the lowest sum likely to attract an individual to India, and (he charge of his voyage 
must also be defrayed- The delay, uncertainty and expense of this arrangement 
form very great difficulties, in tho way of any definito suggestion; and we must 
confess our inability at present tx» submit any positive recommendation, 

10, The expense of the establishment, independent of the salary of tho professor, 
could not, wo imagine, ho very heavy, u native assistant, and few persons to keep 



* 



90 Selections from Educational Records 

Teaching of the apparatus and rooms in order, would be sufficient, and would not involve an ex- 
sceence— co ntd. pense, we presume, exceeding Rs.100 per month. It might be requisite occa- 
sionally to purchase chemical articles, or they might be furnished from the medical 
stores, in either case the aggregate amount could not be very considerable. 

17. We are now prepared to submit our suggestions with regard to the Govern- 
ment Hindu College 3 and the 'building which is to be erected for the Native College 
or Vidyalaya* 

18. For the former of these, the ground is provided, and the plan generally 
approved. An estimate amounting to J?s. 46,090, or eventual!}' 50,000 has been 
submitted to the Military Board ; and it is understood sanctioned by them, though 
not officially ; some slight modifications being made, of but little importance. It 
may therefore be considered that this amount of cost is that, which it has been 
determined to incur. The departure of the architect Captain Buxton from Calcutta 
and the delay inseparable from the execution of public works by the Superintendent 
of Public Buildings, in consequence of his excessive occupation, render it highly 
expedient that a private builder should be employed. Application has accordingly 
been made to Messrs Burn & Co., and their final reply is subjoined, engaging to ^ 
erect the college for Us. 53,901 within a period of 22 months (the latter inclusive 
of the adjacent building)- Independent of their known character as builders, they 
have had a free communication with Captain Buxton, and have received from him 
the instructions, on which their estimate is founded. The estimate has also received 
his sanction ; and he has further promised, whenever occasion calls him to Calcutta, 
to inspoct the progress and execution of the work. It lias been thought sufficient 
therefore to rest satisfied with the offer of Messrs. Burn & Co, 

19, The Government having determined to build a school room for the Native 
Hindu College, and to connect it generally with thoir own Sanscrit College, it is of 
course highly desirable that it should be as near at hand as possible. The same 
object influences the position of the lecture room ; and this combination obviously 
suggests a uniformity of architectural design, as well as local position. We have 
therefore obtained a plan from Captain Buxton, on this principle ; the arrangement, 
as far as the school is alone affected, having previously received the concurrence 
of the managers of the Vidyalaya. The expense of this building will be Rs. 15,998 
and the charge will be the same, of course, independent of the site ; whilst by its 
juxtaposition to the college, and the corresponding elevation of the lecture rooms, 
the range of the buildings will be complete, and will form a respectable embellish- 
ment of its proposed situation, 

20, The construction of the college, with these two additional buildings, will 
amount to Rs, 85,961 but a further cost must be incurred for the ground on which 
the two latter are to be erected. This ground may be obtained on the spot, and 
with reference to the growing value of land in that part of the town on reasonable 



I 



General Committee of Public 1 Instruction 



91 



terms,— Mr, Hare the proprietor consenting to dispose of it at Rs, 500 per cottah, Teaching of 

the whole on the north side of the square being purchased. The additional ground science— conclcL 

it will be necessary in consequence to buy amounts to 3 bcogahs and seven cottahs, 

making a total of five beogahs and seven cottahs. The cost of the additional ground 

will be Rs* 33,500, making the whole sum to be expended Its. 119,401. Of this it 

has already been determined to incur for the two colleges from Rs< GO to 70,000, 

and the greater part of the additional cost being the price of the ground, it may bo 

considered only us an investiture of capital, involving merely an inconsiderable 

sacrifice of interest, 

21, We have only to add that with reference to tho period, that has elapsed 
since the date of the resolution of Government to found tho Sanscrit College of 
Calcutta (21 August 1821) we should strongly recommend its being at least partially 
put in action. It will be very practicable to rent a convenient house in the native 
part of the town ; engage some of the pundits and admit to the foundation pupils, to 
the earlier classes, at least, whenever it shall plcaso Government to authorize such 



an arrangement. 



We have the honour to bo, oto., 



(Signed) J. IL IIARINGTON. 
J. P. LARKINS. 
W. B. BAYLEY. 
H! SIIAKESPEAR. 
HOLT MACKENZIE. 
IL T. PRINSEP. 
A. STIRLING. 
IL IL WILSON, 
J. C. 0. SUTHERLAND. 



Calcutta ; 



The 6th October 1823. 



(24) Extract jrom the despatch, dated 18th February 1824, to the Governor- 
General in Council, Bengal* 

79. Tho ends proposed in tho institution of the Hindoo Collcgc,f and the samo Despatch of ISlh 
may be affirmed of the Mnhomcdnn, were two ; tho first to mnko a favourable Feb. lS2i. 

* PrinW in part in Evidence oj JS32 t Appendix I, No. fl [331/188], 
| Tlio Sanskrit College?, Calcutta . 



92 Selections from Educational Records 

Despatch of 18th impression by our encouragement of their literature upon the minds of the natives ; 

Feb. 1824— and tlie second to promote useful learning. You acknowledge that if the plan lias 
- conf d. } ia a an y effect of the former land it has had none of the latter ; and you add " that 

it must be feared that the discredit attaching to such a failure has gone far to destroy 
the influence which the liberality of the endowment would otherwise have had," 

80. We have from time to time been assured that these colleges though they 
had not till then been useful were in consequence of proposed arrangements just 
about to become so ; and wp have received from you a similar prediction on the 
present occasion. 

81. We are by no means sanguine in our expectation that the slight reforms 
which you have proposed to introduce will be followed by much improvement, and 
we agree with you in certain doubts whether a greater degree of activity even if it 
were produced on the part of the masters would in present circumstances be attended 
with the most desirable results. 

82. With respect to the sciences it is worse than a waste of time to employ 
persons either to teach or to learn them in the state in which they are found in the 
Oriental books. As far as any historical documents may be found in the Oriental 
languages what is desirable is that they should bo translated and this, it is evident, 
wall best be accomplished by Europeans who have acquired the requisite knowledge. 
Beyond these branches what remains in Oriental literature is poetry ; but it has 
never been thought necessary to establish colleges for the cultivation of poetry, 
nor is it certain that this would be the most effectual expedient for the attainment 
of the end. 

83. In the meantime we wish you to be fully apprised of our zeal for the pro- 
gress and improvement of education among the natives of India, and of our willing- 
ness to make considerable sacrifices to that important end, if proper means for the 
attainment of it could be pointed out to us. But we apprehend that the plan of 
the institutions to the improvement of which our attention is now directed was 
originally and fundamentally erroneous. The groat end should not have been to 
teach Hindoo learning, but useful learning. No doubt in teaching useful learning 
to the Hindoos or Mahomedans, Hindoo media or Mahomedan media, so far as they 
were found the most effectual, would have been proper to be employed and Hindoo 
and Mahomedan prejudices would have needed to be consulted while every thing 
which was useful in Hindoo or Mahomedan literature it would have been proper to 

• retain ; nor would there have been any insuperable difficulty in introducing under 
these reservations a system of instruction from which great advantage might have 
been derived. In professing on the other hand to establish seminaries for the pur- 
pose of teaching mere Hindoo, or mere Mahomedan literature, you bound your- 
selves to teach a great deal of what was frivolous, not a little' of what was purely 
mischievous and a small remainder indeed in which utility was in any way concerned 



Despatch of 1824 93 



81, We think that you have taken upon the whole a rational view of what is Despatch of 18lh 
best to be done. In the institutions which exist on a particular footing alterations Feb. 1824 — 
should not be introduced more rapidly than a due regard to existing interests and conoid, 
feelings will dictate ; at the same time that incessant endeavours should bo used 
to supersede what is useless, or worse, in the present course of study by what your 
bettor knowledge will recommend. 

85. In the now college which is to be instituted and which we think you have 
acted judiciously in placing at Calcutta instead of Nuddca and Tirhoot, as originally 
sanctioned, ifc will bo much farther in your power because not fcttored by any preced- 
ing practice, to consult the principle of utility in the course of study which you 
may prescribe. Trusting that the proper degree of attention will be given to this 
important object wo desire that an account of the plan which you approve may be 
transmitted to us and that an opportunity of communicating to you our sentiments 
upon it may be given to us before any attempt to carry it into execution is made. 

(25) Letter, dated IStli August 1824, from the General Committee of Public 

Instruction to the Governor-General* 

To 

The Eight Hon'blo William Pitt, Loud Amherst, Governor-General in 
Council, Fori William. 

My Lorp, 

Wk have the honor to acknowledge the recoipt of a letter from the Persian General Com- 
Secretary to Government, dated the ICth ultimo, forwarding extracts of a despatch miilec, 18-8- 
from the Hon'blc the Court of Directors, under date the 18th February 1821,t on 1S24* 
the subject of the Education of the Natives of British India. 

2. AVe arc happy to find that the sentiments expressed in the letter from the 
llon'ble Court arc, upon the whole, in unison with those principles by which the 
Committee of Education have hitherto regulated their proceedings* The introduc- 
tion of useful knowledge is the great object which they have proposed as the end of 
the measures adopted, or recommended by them ; at the same timo they have kept 
in view that, " in the institutions which exist on a particular footing, alterations 
should not bo introduced moro rapidly than a regard to existing interests and feeling 



* Printed in the Sixth Report from the Select Committee on Indian Territories f J 853, Minutes ot 
Evidence, p. 18f. 

f This is iho dato given in the published letter, but clearly it should bo 18th Februnry 1824 
(document 24), Fisher etatcs [2C5/430] that that document vrn^ communicated to tho Committco 
and quotes from thoir reply, viz., tho proscnt documont (No. 25). 

O 



94 ; Selections from Educational Records 



General Com- will dictate and they are aware of the necessity of " employing Mohammadan and 
mUtee, 18-8-1824 Hindu media, and of consulting the prejudices of the Moharuinadans and Hindus/ ' 
— coMtd. ijx any attempts to introduce improved methods or objects of study which are 

calculated to be attended with success. 

3. "Whilst the Hon'ble Court have thus recognised the principles under which 
the existing institutions should be carried on, they have been pleased to express it 
as their opinion, that the plans of the Hindu College at Benares and Mbhammadan 
College at Calcutta, were " originally and fundamentally erroneous/' and that in 
establishing Seminaries for the purpose of teaching mere Hindu or Mohammadan 
Literature, " the Government bound themselves to teach a great deal of what was, 
frivolous, not a little of what was purely mischievous, and a small remainder indeed 
in which utility w r as in any way concerned." 

4. The remarks made on former institutions of the Government may not be 
thought to require any comment from us particularly, as it is admitted that it is 
necessary to proceed with caution in introducing any modification of their system. 
As applicable however, generally,- and as connected with the Hon'ble Court's injunc- 
tions to respect native prejudices and feelings, we beg leave to offer some observa- 
tions on the circumstances which have hitherto influenced, and which we are of 
opinion, must continue for some time to regulate the constitution and conduct for 
Seminaries for the purpose of native education. 

5. In the first place, without denying that the object of introducing European 
literature and science may have been somewhat too long overlooked, it may be 
questioned whether the Government could originally have founded any other semi- 
naries, than those which it actually established ; viz., the MadraSsa, to teach Moham- 
madan literature and law, and the Benares College, to teach Sanscrit literature 
and Hindu law. Those colleges were founded for Mohammadans and Hindus 
respectively, and would have been of little value to either, if they had proposed 
to teach what neither were disposed to learn. It may be added, w T hat else had 
the Government to offer, on any extensive scale ? What means existed to 
communicating .anything but Mohammadan and Hindu literature either by 
teachers or books ? It was therefore a case of necessity, and almost all that the 
Government in instituting a seminary for the higher classes could give, or the 
people would accept through such a channel, was oriental literature, Mohammadan 
or Hindu. Instruction in the English language and literature could have been 
attempted only on the most limited scale, and as they could not, we apprehend, 
have s been at all introduced into seminaries designed for the general instruction of 
the educated and influential classes of the natives the success of the attempt may 
well be doubted. 

6. We have no doubt that the&fc points will be evident to the Honourable Court 
on further consideration, and we need not further dwell upon them, at least with 



• 



General Committee 95 

reference to the past. The Honourable Court, however, seem to think that the same General Com- 
circumstances no longer impede the introduction of useful knowledge, and that in tniltce, 18-8-1824 
establishing a college in Calcutta, it should not have been restricted to the objects — contd. 
of Hindu learning ; on this point, we beg to observe, that the new Sanscrit College 
in Calcutta was substituted for two colleges proposed to be endowed at Tirhut 
and Nuddiya, the original object of which was declaredly the preservation and 
encouragement of Hindu learning. So far therefore, the Government may be 
considered pledged to the character of the institution, though the pledge does not 
of course extend to bar the cautious and gradual introduction of European science 
in combination with the learning which the people love. It is however of more 
importance to consider, that the Government had in this as well as in former 
instances, little or no choice, and that if they wished to confer an acceptable boon 
upon the most enlightened, or at least most influential class of the Hindu popula- 
tion (the learned and Brahmanical caste), they could do so only by placing the 
cultivation of Sanscrit within their reach ; any other offer would have been useless ; 
tuition, in European science, being neither amongst the sensible wants of the people, 
nor in the power of Government to bestow, 

7- In proposing the improvement of men's mind, it is first necessary to secure 
their conviction, that such improvement is desirable. Now, however satisfied we 
may feel that the native subjects of this Government stand in need of improved - 
instruction, yet every one in the habit of communicating with both the learned and 
unlearned classes, must bo tfell aware, that generally speaking, they continue to 
hold European literature and science in very slight estimation* A knowledge of 
English, for the purpose of gaining a livelihood, is, to a certain extent, a popular 
attainment, and a few of the natives employed by Europeans, accustomed to an 
intimate intercourse with their masters, may perceive that their countrymen have 
something in the way of practical science to learn. These impressions, however, 
are still very partial, and the Maulavi and Pundit, satisfied with their own learning, 
are little inquisitive as to any thing beyond it, and are not disposed to regard the 
literature and science of the West as worth the labour of attainment. As long as 
this is the case, and wo cannot anticipate the very near extinction of such prejudice, 
any attempt to enforce an acknowledgment of the superiority of intellectual pro- 
duce amongst the Natives of the West could only create dissatisfaction, and would 
deter those whoso improvement it is most important to promote as the best means of 
securing a more general amelioration, the members of the literary classes, from 
availing themselves of the beneficence of the Government, by placing themselves 
within the reach of instruction. 

8. The actual state of public feeling is thereforo, we conceive, btill an impedi- 
ment to any general introduction of western literature or science, and although 
we believe the prejudices of the natives against European interference with their 

o 2 



96 Selections from Educational Records 

General Com- education in any shape, are considerably abated, yet they are by no means 
mittee, 18-8-1824 annihilated, and might very easily be roused by any abrupt and injudicious 
— contd. attempts at innovation, to the destruction of the present growing confidence from 

which, in the course of time, the most beneficial consequences may be expected. 
It is much, in our estimation, to have placed all the institutions maintained by 
Government under direct European superintendence, and frorn the continuance 
of that superintendence exercised with temper and discretion, we anticipate i^he 
means of winning the confidence of the officers and pupils of the several seminaries, 
to an extent that will pave the way for the unopposed introduction of such im- 
provement as we may hereafter have the means of effecting, 

9. But supposing that the disposition of the native mind was even as favour- 
able as could be desired, we know not by what means we could at once introduce 4 
the improvements that we presume are meditated. The Honourble Court admit 
the necessity of employing Hindu and Mdhnmnmdnn media, but wh&re are such to 
be obtained for the introduction of foreign learning ? We must teach the teachers 
and provide the books, and by whom are the business of tuition and task of 
translation to be accomplished ? Until the means are provided, it would be pre- 
mature to talk of their application, and we must be content to avail ourselves of the 
few and partial opportunities, that may occur for giving encouragement to the 
extension of a knowledge of the English language amongst those classes, whence 
future preceptors and translators may be reared* To do this with any good effect, 
however, we must qualify the same individuals highly in their own system as well 
as ours, in order that they may be as competent to refute errors as to impart 
truth, if we would wish them to exercise , any influence upon the minds of their 
countrymen. 

10* Under the present circumstances, therefore, the still vigorous prejudices of 
^ both Mohammadans and Hindus, and the want of available instruments for any 
beneficial purpose of greater extent, we conceive that it is undoubtedly necessary 
to make it the business of Government institutions intended for those classes 
respectively, to teach (we hope not long exclusively) Mohammadan and Hindu 
literature and science. 

11. Without wishing to enhance the value of Oriental studies beyond a fair 
and just standard, we must beg further permission to state that, in our judgment 
the Honourable Court has been let to form an estimate of their extent and merits 
not strictly accurate. The Honourable Court are pleased to observe that " it is 
worse than a waste of time ?? to employ persons either to teach or learn the 
sciences in the state in which they are found in Oriental books. This position is of 
so comprehensive a nature, - that it obviously requires a considerable modification, 
and the different branches of science intended to be included in it must be 
particularised befoie a correct appreciation can be formed of their absolute and 



"A 



General Committee 



97 



comparative value. The metaphysical sciences, as found in Sanscrit and Arabic General Com- 
writings, arc, we believe* fully as worthy of being studied in those languages as in mittee, 18-8-1824 
any other. The arithmetic and algebra of the Hindus lead to the same principles as contd. 
those of Europe and in the Madressa, the elements of mathematical science, which 
are taught, are those of Euclid ; law, a principal object of study in all the institu- 
tions* is one of vital importance to the good Government of the country, and 
language is the ground work upon which all future improvements must materially 
depend. To diffuse a knowledge of these things, language and law especially, 
cannot, therefore, be considered a waste of time, and with unfeigned deference 
to the Honourable Court, we most respectfully bring to their more deliberate 
attention that, in the stated estimate of the value of the Oriental sciences, several 
important branches appear to have escaped their consideration. 

32. With respect to general literature also, we should submit that some 
points can Scarcely have been sufficiently present to the minds of the Hon'ble Court 
when the orders in question were issued. The Honourable Court observe, that 
any historical documents which may bo found in the original languages should be 
translated by competent Europeans. But without dwelling on the magnitude of 
the task, if Mohammadan history is to be comprehended, or questioning the utility of 
employing Europeans in this branch of literature, we beg leave to remark that there 
appears to be no good reason why the Natives of India should be debarred from 
cultivating a knowledge of their, own historical records, or why the translations of 
the countries in which they have a natural interest, should not be deserving of 
their perusal. 

13. Besides science and historical documents, the Honourable Court observe, 
" what remains in Oriental literature is poetry, but that it never has been thought 
necessary to establish colleges for the cultivation of poetry." We are not aware 
that any colleges in India have been established with this view, although we believe 
few colleges exist in any country in which poetical works are not taught to a great 
extent, and it would bo taking a very narrow view of the objects of education to 
exclude them. We do not know, indeed, how any language and literature can be 
successfully studied if its poetical compositions arc not cultivated with considerable 
attention ; as a part, therefore, and a very important part of Sanscrit and Arabic 
literature, as the source of national imagery, the expression of national feeling, 
and the depository of the most approved phraseology and style, the poetical writings 
of the Hindus and Mohammadans appear to bo legitimately comprehended amongst 
the objects of literary seminaries, founded for Mohammadans and Hindus. 

14, Under these considerations, and upon a deliberate view of the real circum- 
stances of the case, wo flatter ourselves that the Honourable Court will feel disposed 
to approve of the arrangements that have been adopted or are in progress with 
the sanction of your Lordship in Council, for the improved education of the natives 



OS 



Selections from Educational Records 



Gtwrol Com- this country. Wc must for the present go with the tide of popular |>rcjudice, 

tnitier, JS-S-JS2J find wo have the less regret in doing so, ns we trust we have said sufficient to show 
— conoid. that the course is by no means unprofitable. At the same time we are fully aware 

of the value of those accessions which may be made from European science and 
literature, to the sum total of Asiatic knowledge, and shall endeavour, in pursuance 
of the sentiments and intentions of Government, to avail ourselves of every 
favourable opportunity for introducing them when it can be done without offending 
the feelings and forfeiting the confidence of those for whose advantage their intro- 
duction is designed. 

We have, etc., 

(Signed) J. H. HARINGTON. 

„ J. P. LAEKINS. 

„ W. W. MARTIN. 

„ J. C. C. SUTHERLAND. 

„ H. SHAKESPEAR. 

„ HOLT MACKENZIE. 

„ H. H. WILSON. 

„ A. STIRLING. 

„ W. B. BAYLBY. 

Calcutta ; 
The lSth August 1S2L 



{26) Address, dated 1 1th December 1823, from Raja Rammolian Roy.* 



Sin, 



)tamm* f ^ Rot * * )e £ ' cave *° FCn( * y ou accompanying address and shall feel obliged if 

a j you will have the poodne^s to lay it before the Right Jlon'blo the Governor-General 

in Council. 

I have*, etc., 
RAMMOHUN ROY* 

Calcutta ; 
The 11th Derrmber 1023. 



• t*riM«Jit»(i)C;.T&ETr^ /is-rfifl. p|>. GS 71 ; (2)C.Jf. Cawing*** 

A&irt**!& P<srt;x«"\t on /*, <?w?i>* rf Gftttt Britain in IrJia* rtc. f 



1 



Raja RammoJian Roy 99 

To 

His Excellency the Eight Hon'ble William Pitt, Lord Amherst, 
My Lord, 

Humbly reluctant as the natives of India are to obtrude upon the notice of Address by 
Government the Sentiments they entertain on any public measure, there are circum- Rammolian Roy 
stances when silence would be carrying this respectful feeling to culpable excess. — contd. 
The present Rulers of India, coming from a distance of many thousand miles to 
govern a people whose language, literature, manners, customs, and ideas are almost 
entirely new and strange to them, cannot easily become so intimately acquainted 
with their real circumstances, as the natives of the country are themselves. We 
should therefore be guilty of a gross dereliction of duty to ourselves, and afford 
our Rulers just ground of complaint at our apathy, did we omit on occasions of 
importance like the present to supply them with such accurate information as might 
enable them to devise and adopt measures calculated to be beneficial to the country, 
and thus second by our local knowledge and experience their declared benevolent 
intentions for its improvement. 

The establishment of a new Sangscrit School in Calcutta evinces the laudable 
desire of Government to improve the Natives of India by Education, — a blessing for 
which they must ever be grateful ; and every well wisher of the human race must 
be desirous that the efforts made to promote it should be guided by the most enligh- 
tened principles, so that the stream of intelligence may flow into the most useful 
channels. 

When this Seminary of learning was proposed, we understood that the Govern- 
ment in England had ordered a considerable sum of money to be annually devoted to 
the instruction of its Indian Subjects. We were filled with sanguine hopes that this 
sum would be laid out in employing European Gentlemen of talents and education 
to instruct the natives of India in Mathematics, ^Natural Philosophy, Chemistry, 
Anatomy and other useful Sciences, which the Nations of Europe have carried to a 
s degree of perfection that has raised them above the inhabitants of other parts of the 
world. 

While we looked forward with pleasing hope to the dawn of knowledge thus 
promised to the rising generation, our hearts were filled with mingled feelings of 
delight and gratitude ; we already offered up thanks to Providence for inspiring 
the most generous and enlightened of the Nations of the West with the glorious 
ambitions of planting in Asia the Arts and Sciences of modern Europe* 

We now find that the Government are establishing a Sangscrit school under 
Hindoo Pundits to impart such knowledge as is already current in India. This 
Seminary (similar in character to those which existed in Europe* before the time 
of Lord Bacon) can only be expected to load the minds of youth with grammatical ' 



4 



■j 



100 Selections from E&xicaiional Records 

Address by niceties and metaphysical distinctions of Jittle or no practicable use to the possessors 
Rammolian Roy or to society. The pupils will there acquire what was known two thousand years 
— contd. a g 0? ^vifch the addition of vain and empty subtil ties since produced by Speculative 

men, such as is already commonly taught in all parts of India. 

The Sangscrit language, so difficult that almost a life time is necessary for its 
perfect acquisition, is well known to have been for ages a lamentable check on the 
diffusion of knowledge ; and the learning concealed under this almost impervious 
veil is far from sufficient to reward the labour of acquiring it. But if it were thought 
necessary to perpetuate this language for the sake of the portion of the valuable 
information it contains, this might be much more easily accomplished by other 
means than the establishment of a new Sangscrit College ; for there have been always 
and are now numerous professors of Sangscrit in the different parts of the country, 
engaged in teaching this language as well as the other branches of literature which., 
are to be the object of the new Seminary. Therefore their more diligent cultivation, 
if desirable, would be effectually promoted by holding out premiums and granting 
certain allowances to those most eminent Professors, who have already undertaken 
on their own account to teach them, and would by such rewards be stimulated to 
still greater exertions. 

■From these considerations, as the sum set apart for the instruction of the Natives 
of India was intended by the Government in England, for the improvement of its 
Indian subjects, I beg leave to state, with due deference to your Lordship's exalted 
situation, that if the plan now adopted be followed, it will completely defeat the 
object proposed ; since no improvement can be expected from inducing young men 
to consume a dozen of years of the most valuable period of their lives in acquiring 
the niceties of the Byakurun or Sangscrit Grammar. For instance, in learning to 
discuss such points as the following : Khad signifying to eat, hliadat^ he or she or 
it eats* Query, whether does the word kliaduti, token as a whole, convey the mean- 
ing 7*6, she, or it eats, or are separate parts of this meaning conveyed by distinct 
portions of the word ? As if in the English language it were asked, how much 
meaning is there in the eat, how much in the s ? and is the whole meaning of the 
word conveyed by those two portions of it distinctly, or by them taken jointly ? 

Neither can much improvement arise from such speculations as the following, 
which are the themes Suggested by the Vedant : — In what manner is the soul 
absorbed into the deity ? What relation does it bear to the divine essence ? Nor 
will youths be fitted to be better members of society by the Vedantic doctrines, 
which teach them to believe that all visible things have no real existence ; that as 
father, brother, etc., have no actual entirety, they consequently deserve no real 
affection, and therefore the sooner we escape from them and leave the world the 
better. Again, no essential benefit can be derived by the student of the Meemangsa 
from knowing what it is that makes the killer of a goat sinless on pronouncing 



V 



1 

1 



Baja Bammohan Boy 101 

certain passages of the Veda, and what is the real nahirc and operative influence Address hj 
of passages of the Vcd, etc. Jinmmohan 

Again the student of the Nyaya Shastra cannot be paid to have improved his conoid, 
mind after lie has learned from it into how many ideal classes the objects in the 
Universe are divided, and what speculative relation the soul bears to the body, the 
body to the soul, the eye to the oar, etc. 

In order to enable your Lordship to appreciate the utility of encouraging such 
imaginary learning as above characterised, I beg your Lordship will be pleased to 
compare the state of science and literature in Europe before the time of Lord Bacon, 
with the progress of knowledge made since lie wrote. 

If it had been intended to keep the British nation in ignorance of real know- 
ledge the Baconian philosophy would not have been allowed to displace the system 
of the schoolmen, which was the best, calculated to perpetuate ignorance. In the 
same manner the Sangscrit system of education would be the best calculated to 
keep this country in darkness, if such had been the policy of the British Legislature. 
But as the improvement of the native population is the object of the Government, 
it will consequently promote a more liberal and enlightened system of instruction, 
embracing mathematics, natural philosophy, chemistry and anatomy, with other 
useful sciences which may be accomplished with the sum proposed by employing a 
few gentlemen of talents and learning educated in Europe, and providing a college 
furnished with the necessary books, instruments and other apparatus. 

In representing this subject to your Lordship I conceive myself discharging a 
solemn duty which I owe to my countrymen and also to that enlightened Sovereign 
and Legislature which have extended their benevolent cares to this distant land 
actuated by a desire to improve its inhabitants and I therefore humbly trust you 
will excuse the liberty I have taken in thus expressing my sentiments to your Lord- 
ship. 

I have, etc., 
IUMMOIIUN ROY. 

Calcutta ; 
The 11th December 1S23. 



v 



CHAPTER VI 

Macaulay^ Minute. 

This controversy, which came to a head in 1823, dragged on and 
led in 1835 to Lord Macaulay's famous minute. The Committee of 
Public Instruction was divided against itself in the matter — witness 
Mr. H. T. Prinsep's minute of the 9th July 1834 and his note of the 15fch 
February 1835 (documents Nos. 27 and 31). Further evidence of the 
condition of things is given in two letters from the Secretary of the 
Committee (documents Nos. 28 and 29). These last were the occasion 
of Macaulay's minute, which is re-printed in extenso (document No. 30) . 
Lord Bentinck's Resolution of the 7th March 1835 (document No. 32) 
appeared to close the controversy, the history of which is given in the 
next chapter as document No. 33. 

The famous minute was not generally known at the time. It is 
said to have been published in England in 1838, but this is doubtful. 
\Tacaulay himself re-read it again in 1853 and possibly showed it to 
Cameron.* Allusions to it were made in or about that year. The 
Director of Public Instruction in Madras reproduced it in 1855 ;f 
Woodrow published it in 1862, J together with other obiter dicta of the 
great essayist ; and the minute was republished soon after in a London 
Magazine. The original manuscript copy of the jninute has been lost. 
But there is among the Government of India records an authenticated 
copy, from which the document here given is taken. 

Document No. 31 is of particular interest. It appears never to 
have been published. The manuscript bears the marginal remarks 
of Lord Macaulay written in pencil with his own hand. 



* See C. H. Cameron, An address to Parliament, etc., 1853, p. G4. 
t A. J. ArrnvmrtOT, Selections from the records of the Madras Government No. ii, 1855. 
% H. Woodkow, Macaulay's viinvtes on education in India written in the years 1S35, 1S36 
$837 and now first collected from the records in the Department of Public Instruction, 1802. 

( 102 )j 



i 



{ 

Minute by II. 1\ Priusep 



103 



(27) Extract from a minute by tlie Ilon'bh IL T. Priusep, dated the 9th 

* July 1S3&. 

Tho Secretary of the Sub-Committee of tlio Madrissa Las sent to mo for perusal Minute by II. T. 
the proceedings and correspondence connected with that Institution, It bad Prinsep 9 9tk July 
esavped his recollection that I was a member of this sub-committee and hence 1 1834. 
was not summoned to its meeting and had no opportunity boforo of making myself 
acquainted with its proceedings since the elate of my departure to sea in November 
1832. 

I now first learn that on the 2Gth April 1831 at a meeting of the sub-committee 
at which only Messrs. Shakcspear and Colvin were present the following resolu- 
tion was passed : * 

" The Committee being of opinion thai the time has arrived for encouraging 
more openly and decidedly the study of English in the Madrissa resolved that from 
the present date no student bo elected to a scholarship unless on the express condi- 
tion of studying English as well us Arabic*" 

This Resolution if allowed to stund, will have the effect of converting an insti- 
tution established and endowed specifically for the revival and encouragement of 
Arabic literature for the education of Kazccs and Moulvics into a mere seminary 
for the teaching of English. I protest against this measure as hasty and indiscreet, 
as preventing the funds of an endowment from the purposes to which they wero 
specifically assigned and as involving nothing less than a breach of trust. If the 
teaching of English be attempted to be put on any other footing than a course 
of study thrown open to the students of the Madrissa to bo undertaken or not at 
their perfoct option; if a preference of any bo given to it in the distribution of 
jagcers, we shall bo making a change in the character of tho Institution such as 
nothing but an order of the Government which made tho endowment could justify* 
But the resolution goes further than this. It not only gives preference to those 
who study English but gives to them a monopoly of tho jagcers, that is, it makes 
English the sine qua nan of study at a College of Moulvics. Tho next stop will 
be to transfer the Professors' allowances to teachers of English and then will follow 
in duo course tho voting of Arabic and Persian to bo dead and damned. I protest 
against this course of proceeding at the first step and feel so strongly on the subject 
that unless this resolution bo rescinded I cannot retain my seat in this Sub- 
Committee, 

H- # H* 4* sfc * t|i 

r2 



i04 



Selections from Educational Records 



General Com- 
mittee, 21st Jan. 
1835. 



(28) Extract from a letter, No. 2093, dated 21st January 1835, from J. C. C. 
Sullierland, Esq., Secretary, General Committee of Public Instruction) 
to the Secretary to Government in the General Department 



* 



* 



* 



14, The recurring and inconvenient discussions to which I have referred, 
whatever their immediate form or subject, have all had their origin in a division 
of opinion on a few important fundamental questions, the decision in which can 
proceed only from the Supreme Government, These questions may be m0 st briefly 
described to be the following : The benefit and the duty of communicating the 
knowledge of European literature and science, through the medium of direct instruct- 
ion in ths English language, the utility or the policy of affording encouragement 
to the cultivation of the oriental systems of learning and of the learned languages 
of the Mahomedans and the Hindoos, and the propriety or expediency (even should 
the advantage of direct instruction through the medium of the English language 
be admitted) of superseding by such instruction the course of oriental studies in 
the institutions which have been already established with an express view to the 
promotion of oriental literature. 

15. There are many obvious considerations of difficulty connected with the 
important questions above stated. They embrace, indeed, when regarded in all 
their extent and consequences, the whole ^ibject of the most proper means for the 
fulfilment, as far as depends on the effect of direct instruction, of the one great 
duty of England towards India, that of improving the minds and elevating the 
character of the Indian people. They require for their determination a full 
advertence alike to present circumstances and to ultimate wants and objects ; 
and the most condensed and practical discussion of them could not fail to be very 
voluminous, and to include various topics of speculative and, perhaps, doubtful 



argument. 



tit 



* 



18. On the necessity of soliciting some decisive general instructions from the 
Government, all the members of the Committee are agreed. The paramount value 
and obligation of communicating direct instruction ill English literature and science 
in seminaries for higher education, endowed and supported by the Government, 
and the justice and expediency of modifying, though with all proper caution and 
regard to actual circumstan ces and claims, the systems of the existing Government 
institutions so as to render such instruction a principal branch of the studies prose- 
cuted in them are the immediate propositions of importance advocated strongly 
by one portion of the Com mittee and disputed, though perhaps on varying grounds 



ft 4 event I Com m it tee 



105 



and in different detjre*^ by the other, on which if most mpuMto thai the bimti- General Com- 

incuts of tJovvrumcnt should ho declared, mittcc, 2h! Jan. 

76\?J— eoncld* 

* * * & Tfc 

22, As rc^pecte the former of the'e consideration*, the view of tfomc of the. 

Commit toe who distant from tlm proposition may 
P y*s fnr tj„ j j t oxpn .^ 0f i f roin the following extract from 

ration «if tia* uralt i'-*iruti / tin- 1 t / i 

IMlu o*tliyt\ paragraph*/ as Inch have been Mmqi^t^i for trie 

draft of the General Report for 1RW of the 
Committees operations: "This portion of oar Committee fully appreciates tlio 
importance of en atio;: u ta^t*> for En»lr h tciotic^ am! literature amount the natives, 
tin: e„\ tension of which cannot hut contribute, to a widtu diffusion of European know- 
ledge in the vernacular diahrts hut they d* i em it to be their iivsi duty to reviw 
and extend the cultivation of the literature of the count rv. and regard the. intro 
duct ion of the hcionrc ami literature of Europe a.s an improvement to bo engrafted 
thcreujMm, rather than an object to be pursued exclusively, or with any marked 
and decided preference/* 

23, Modifying perhaps m >oim* decree tie* term; of the position laid down 
in the nhovo extract, tle-n* are others of the Miiue division of the Committee who 
are generally of opinion that it*i^ not nece ury nor advisable that the llovorument 
idjould manifest a preference for any parth ular i-ytitem of learning, and who would 
recommend, as the u\ot wr^ and becoming cotme for its observance, that it should 
aftord an indifferent and e*pud eiu onnig*anent to all ^y^tems, as instruct ion in 
them mieht appear to be demanded by tin* slate of opinion and ftvJmj* anion*; the 
j*voplo then reives. 

The forejjointf 11 pjnt*rrap]e* mil 'A be considered an containing tin; >euti- 
m^ut-i and viewh of Xbvsrf. iJiun. Kaunimiuh, ItusimY, f'omx mid Tnm:t,YAN\ and 
though not convoyed in that form are tantamount to a minute iceorded by them. 
Much of t!n*ir viotvrf are oppo ed to die re<t of the Committee, wIioms opinion** and 
nrguunmM I idudt have tin* honour of submitting m a letter which I shalt address 
you under tomorrow'** date. To lmv« embodied them in this addre^ would have 
MV<dK:d it to an ttmtaiml Mze, 

(2.9) iWtrmt from htter, So. 20!) J, duUd 22nd January JSMJrom the 
General (Jomwittee of Public Instruction to Government. 

7. Two great principles were early hud down by thin Committee an fundament* General Com- 
ally e*^ential to the accomplishment of the purposes indicated in the Act; im(l niillee, 22nd Ja n 

1835. 



i 



4 



106 Selections from B&ucalional Records 

General Com- these were first tliat tlic Committee should in all things endeavour so as to shape 
miilee, 22nd Jan. its conduct and proceedings as to win the confidence of the educated and influential 
1835— concld. classes of the people and if possible to carry these classes within them in all the 

measures they might adopt for the revival and improvement of the literature of 

the country. 

# * % $ # # 

10. The second principle laid down by the Committee was that whereas the 
funds at their disposal were quite inadequate to any purpose of general and Universal 
instruction the best application that could be made of them consistently with the 
ends in view was to assist the seminaries of more advanced education through 
which only the Committee could hope to revive and improve the literature of the 
country and to encourage learned men. 

* * * # 1 # * 

23. The cause advocated by the party whose sentiments arc conveyed in my 
letter of yesterday is not that of science and literature at all, but of rudimontal 
English as a means of eventually pursuing the course into literature and science, 
should life be long enough and the inclination last. 

* $ $ * # * 

25. Against Such a spirit of innovation the other Members of the Committee 
most strongly protest, and they confidently rely on the Government to support 
them in the maintenance of the great principles that have heretofore from the 
, time when the Committee was' first instituted guided all its measures and proceed- 
ings. 

* * * * * * 

30. Upon all these questions, as' well as upon a variety of others, the Committee 
is divided, atid for the fiual decision of them it has been agreed to submit the present 
reference to the supreme authority, and to be guided, of course, by the result. 

31. This address may be considered as conveying the general views and opinion 
of Mr. IL Shakespear, Mr. II. T. Pbinsep, Mr. W. EL Macnaghten, Mr. J. Pkinsep 
and myself.* 



*J. 0 0. Sutherland, 



Macaulay's Minute 107 

(30) Minute by ilie Hon'ble T* B. MacatdayS dated the 2nd February 

1835* 

As it soems to be the opinion of some of the gentlemen^ who compose the Macaidmfs 
Committee of Public Instruction that the course which they have hitherto pursued minute, 2nd Feb. 
was strictly prescribed by the British Parliament in 1813J and as, if that opinion JSS5 t 
be correct, a legislative act will be necessary to warrant a change, I have thought 
it right to refrain from taking any part in the preparation of the adverse statements 
which arc now before us, and to reserve what I had to say on the subject till it 
should come before me as a Member of the Council of India. 

It does not appear to me that the Act of Parliament can by any art of 
construction be made to bear the meaning which has been assigned to it. It 
contains nothing about the particular languages or sciences which are to be 
studied. A sum is set apart " for the revival and promotion of literature, and the 
encouragement of the learned natives of India, and fc?r the introduction and pro- 
motion of a knowledge of the sciences among the inhabitants of the British 
territories." It is argued, or rather taken for granted, that by literature the * 
Parliament can have meant only Arabic and Sanscrit literature ; that they never 
would have given the honourable appellation of ** a learned native " to a native 
who was familiar with the poetry of Milton, the metaphysics of Locke, and the 
physics of Newton; but that they meant to designate by that name only such 
persons as might have studied in the sacred books of the Hindoos all the uses of 
cusa-grass, and alt the mysteries of absorption into the Deity. This does not 
appear to be a very satisfactory interpretation. To take a parallel case : Suppose 
that the Pacha of Egypt, a country once superior in knowledge to the nations of 
Europe, but now sunk far below them, were to appropriate a sum for the purpose 
" of reviving and promoting literature, and encouraging learned natives of Egypt," 
would any bodj' infer that ho meant the youth of his Pachalik to give years to the 
study of hieroglyphics, to search into all the doctrines disguised under the fable of 
Osiris, and to ascertain with all possible accuracy the ritual with which cats and 
onions were anciently adored ? Would lie be justly charged with inconsistency 
if, instead of employing his young Subjects in decyphcring obelisks, he were to 
order them to bo instructed in the English and French languages, and in all the 
sciences to which those languages are the chief keys ? 

The words on which the supporters of the old system rely do not bear them 
out, and other words follow which seem to bo quite decisive on the other side, This 



* For roforenco to provioua publications son pp, 205 2()(» 
t Soo document No, 29, p. 105. 
% Reo document No. 7. p. 22 t 



108 Selections from Educational Records 

Macauhtfs lakh of rupees is get apart not only for <f reviving literature in India/' the phrase 
minute, 2nd Feb. 0 n which their whole interpretation is founded, but also " for the introduction and 
1835 contd. promotion of a knowledge of the sciences among the inhabitants of the British 

territories '—words which are alone sufficient to authorise all the changes for which 

I contend. 

If the Council agree in my construction no legislative act will be necessary. 
If they differ from me, I will propose a short act rescinding that clause of the 
Charter of 1813 from which the difficulty arises. 

The argument which I have been considering affects only the form of proceeding* 
But the admirers of the oriental system of education have used another argument, 
which, if we admit it to be valid, is decisive against all change. They conceive 
that the public faith is pledged to the present system, and that to alter the appro- 
priation of any of the funds which have hitherto been spent in encouraging the 
study of Arabic and Sanscrit would be downright spoliation. It is not easy to 
understand by what process of reasoning they can have arrived at this conclusion. 
The grants which are made from the public purse for the encouragement of litera- 
ture differ in no respect from the grants which are made, from the same purse for 
other objects of real or Supposed utility* We found a sanitarium on a spot which 
we suppose to be healthy. Do we thereby pledge ourselves to keep a sanitarium 
there if the result should not answer our expectations % Wo Commence the erection 
of a pier. Is it a violation of the public faith to stop the works, if we afterwards 
see reason to believe that the building will be useless ? The rights of property 
are undoubtedly sacred. But nothing endangers those rights so much as the 
practice, now unhappily too common, of attributing them to things to which thej T 
do not belong. Those who would impart to abuses the sanctity of property are in 
truth imparting to the institution of property the unpopularity and the fragility 
of abuses. If the Government has given to any person a formal assnrance^-nay, 
if the Government has excited in anj r person's mind a reasonable expectation — that 
he shall receive a certain income as a teacher or a learner of Sanscrit or Arabic, 
I would respect that person's pecuniary interests. I woiild rather err on the side 
of liberality to individuals than Suffer the public faith to be called in question. 
But to talk of a Government pledging itself to teach certain languages and certain 
sciences, though those languages may become useless, though those sciences may 
be exploded, Secmg to me quite unmeaning. There is not a single word in any 
public instrument from which it can be inferred that the Indian Government ever 
intended to give any pledge on this subject, or ever considered the destination of 
these funds as unalterably fixed. But, had it been otherwise, I should have denied 
the competence of our predecessors to bind us by any pledge on Such a subject. 
• Suppose that a Government had in the last century enacted in the most solemn 
manner that all its subjects should, to the end of time, be inoculated for the small- 



Macaulay s Minute 109 

joox, would that Government be bound to persist in the practice after Jenner's Macctulaijs 
discover)' ? These promises of which nobody claims the performance, and from minute, 2nd Feb. 
which nobody can grant a release, these vested rights which vest in nobody, this 183$ — contd. 
property without proprietors, this robbery which makes nobody poorer, may be 
comprehended by persons of higher faculties than mine. I consider this plea 
merely as a set form of words, regularly used both in England and in India, in 
defence of every abuse for which no other plea can be set up. 

I hold this lakh of rupees to be quite at the disposal of the Governor-General 
in Council for the purpose of promoting learning in India in any way which may 
be thought most advisable. I hold his Lordship to be quite as free to direct that 
it shall no longer be employed in encouraging Arabic and Sanscrit, as he is to direct 
that the reward for killing tigers hi Mysore shall be diminished, or that no more 
public money shall be expended on the chaunting at the cathedral. 

We now come to the gist of the matter. We have a fund to be employed 
as Government shall direct for the intellectual improvement of the people of this 
country. The simple question is, what is the most useful way of employing it ? 

All parties seem to be agreed on one point, that the dialects commonly 
spoken among the natives of this part of India contain neither literary nor scientific 
information, and are moreover so poor and rude that, until they are enriched from 
some other quarter, it will not be easy to translate any valuable work into them. 
It seems to be admitted on all sides^ that the intellectual improvement of those 
classes of the people who have the means of pursuing higher studies can at present 
be effected only by means of some language not vernacular amongst them. 

What then shall that language be % One-half of the committee maintain 
that it should be the English. The other half strongly recommend the Arabic and 
Sanscrit. The whole question seems to me to be — which language is the best 
worth knowing ? 

I have no knowledge of either Sanscrit or Arabic. But I have done what 
I could to form a correct estimate of their value, I have read translations of the 
most celebrated Arabic and Sanscrit works. I have conversed, both here and at 
home, with men distinguished by their proficiency in the Eastern tongues. I am 
quite ready to take the oriental learning at the valuation of the orientalists them- 
selves. I have never found one among them who could deny that a single shelf 
of a good European library was worth the whole native literature of India and 
Arabia. The intrinsic superiority of the Western literature is indeed fully admitted 
by those members of the committee who support the oriental plan of education. 

It will hardly be disputed, I suppose, that the department of literature in 
which the Eastern writers stand highest is poetry. And I certainly never met 
with any orientalist who ventured to maintain that the Arabic and Sanscrit poetry 
could be compared to that of the great European nations; , But when we pass 

Q 



110 Selections from Educational Records 

Macaiday's from works of imagination to works in which facts are recorded and general principles 
minute, 2nd Feb, investigated, the superiority of the Europeans becomes absolutely immeasurable. 
1835— contd, ft j Sj j believe, no exaggeration to say that all the historical information which 

has been collected from all the books written in the Sanscrit language is less valuable 
than what may be found in the most paltry abridgments used at preparatory schools 
in England* In every branch of physical or moral philosophy, the relative position 
of the two nations is nearly the same. 

How then stands the case ? We have to educate a people who cannot at 
present be educated by means of their mother-tongue. AVe must teach them 
some foreign language. The claims of our own language it is hardly necessary to 
recapitulate. It stands pre-eminent even among the languages of the West. It 
abounds with works of imagination not inferior to the noblest which Greece has 
bequeathed to us, — with models of every species of eloquence, — with historical 
compositions which, considered merely as narratives, have seldom been surpassed, 
and which, considered as vehicles of ethical and political instruction, have never 
been equalled, — with just and lively representations of human life and human 
nature,- — with the most profound speculations on metaphysics, morals, govern- 
ment, jurisprudence, trade, — with full and correct information respecting every 
experimental science which tends to preserve the health , to increase the comfort, 
or to expand the intellect of man. AVhoever knows that language has ready access 
to all the vast intellectual wealth which all the wisest nations of the earth have 
created and hoarded in the course of ninety generations. It may safely be said 
that the literature now extant in that language is of greater value than all the 
literature which thiee hundred years ago was extant in all the languages of the 
world together. Nor is this all. In India, English is the language spoken by the 
ruling class. It is -spoken by the higher class of natives at the seats of Government. 
It is likely to become the language of commerce throughout the seas of the East. 
It is the language of two groat European communities which are rising, the one in 
the south of Africa, the other in Australasia, — communities which are every year 
becoming more important and more closely connected with our Indian empire. 
Whether we look at the intrinsic value of our literature, or at the particular situa- 
1 tion of this country, we shall see the strongest reason to think that, of all foreign 
tongues, the English* tongue is that which would be the most useful to our native 
subjects. 

The question now before us is simply whether, when it is in our power to 
teach this language, we shall teach languages in which, by universal confession, 
there are no books on any subject which deserve to be compared to our own, 
whether, when we can teach European science, we shall teach sj^stems which, by 
universal confession, wherever they differ from those of Europe differ for the worse, 
and whether, when we can patronize sound philosophy and true history, we shall 



r 



Macatday's Minnie 111 

countenance, at the public expense, medical doctrines which would disgrace an Macaitlay's 
English farrier, astronomy which would move laughter in girls at an English boarding minute, 2nd Feb. 
school, history abounding with kings thirty feet high and reigns thirty thousand ^33 — contd. 
years long, and geography made of seas of treacle and seas of butter. 

We aie not without experience to guide us. History furnishes several ana- \ 
logous cases, and they all teach the same lesson. There are, in modern times, 
to go no further, two memorable instances of a great impulse given to the mind of 
a whole society, of prejudices overthrown, of knowledge diffused, of taste purified, 
of arts and sciences planted in countries which had recently been ignorant and 
barbarous. 

The first instance to which I refer is the great revival of letters among the 
Western nations at the close of the fifteenth and the beginning of the sixteenth 
century. At that time almost everything that was worth reading was contained 
in the writings of the ancient Greeks and Romans, Had our ancestors acted as 
the Committee of Public Instruction has hitherto acted, — had they neglected the 
language of Thucydides and Plato, and the language of Cicero and Tacitus; had 
they confined their attention to the old dialects of our owh island, had they printed 
nothing and taught nothing at the universities but chronicles in Anglo-Saxon and 
romances in Norman French, — would England ever have been what she now is ? 
What the Greek and Latin were to the contemporaries of More and AScham, our 
tongue is to the people of India, The literature of England is now more valu- 
able than that of classical antiquity. I doubt whether the Sanscrit literature be 
as valuable as that of our Saxon and Norman progenitors. In some departments — 
in history for example — I am certain that it is much less so. 

Another instance may be said to be still before our eyes. Within the last 
hundred and twenty years, a nation which had previously been in a state as barbarous 
as that in which our ancestors were before the Crusades has gradually 
emerged from the ignorance in which it was sunk, and has taken its place 
among civilised communities. I speak of Russia. There is now in that country 
a large educated class abounding with persons fit to servo the State in the highest 
functions, and in nowiso inferior to the most accomplished men who adorn the 
best circles of Paris and London. There is reason to hope that this vast empire 
t which, in the time of our grand-fathers, was probably behind the Punjab, may 
in the time of our grand-children, be pressing close on France and Britain in the 
career of improvement. And how was this change effected ? Not by flattering 
national prejudices ; not by feeding the mind of the young Muscovite with the old 
women's stories which his rude fathers had bolioved ; not by filling his head wibh 
lying legends about St* Nicholas ; not by encouraging him to study the great 
question, whether the world was or not created on the 13fch of September : not 
fry calling him " a learned native 99 when he had mastered all these points of know- 

Q2 



n 



112 Selections jrom Educational Records 

Mamiilmfs ledge; but by teaching him those foreign languages in which the greatest mass 
minute, 2nd Feb. of information had been laid up, and thus putting all that information within his 
2835— contd, reach. The languages of western Europe civilised Kussia. I cannot doubt that 

they will do for the Hindoo what they have done for the Tartar. 

And what are the arguments against that course which seems to be alike 
recommended by theory and by experience ? It is said that we ought to securo 
the co-operation of the native public, and that we can do this only by teaching 
Sanscrit and Arabic* 

I can by no means admit that, when a nation of high intellectual attainments 
undertakes to superintend the education of a nation comparatively ignorant, 
the learners are absolutely to prescribe the course which is to be taken by the 
teachers. It is not necessary however to say anything on this subject. For 
it is proved by unanswerable evidence, that we are not at present securing the 
co-operation of the natives. It would be bad enough to consult their intellect- 
ual taste at the expense of their intellectual health. But we are consulting neither. 
We are withholding from them the learning which is palatable to them. We are 
forcing on them the mock learning which they nauseate. 

This is proved by the fact that we are forced to pay our Arabic and Sanscrit 
students while those who learn English are willing to pay us. All the declama- 
tions in the world about the love and reverence of the natives for their sacred dialects 
' will never, in the mind of any impartial person, outweigh this undisputed fact, 
that we cannot find in all our vast empire a single student who will let us teach 
him those dialects, unless we will pay him. 

I have now before me the accounts of the Mudrassa for one month, the 
month of December, 1833.* The Arabic students appear to have been seventy- 
seven in number. All receive stipends from the public. The whole amount paid 
to them is above 500 rupees a month. On the other side of thtf account stands 
the following item : 

Deduct amount * realized from the out-students of English for the months 
of May, June, and July last — 103 rupees. 

I have been told that it is merely from want of local experience that I am 
surprised at these phcenomena, and that it is not the fashion for students in India 
to study at their own charges. This only confirms me in my opinions. Nothing 
is more certain than that it never can in any part of the world be necessary to pay 
men for doing what they think pleasant or profitable. India is no exception to 
this rule. The people of India do not require to be paid for eating rice when they 



* Sec document No. 12, p. 3G, which gives the accounts for 1823, There were then 75 students 
receiving 773 a month. \ 



* 



Macaulajfs Minute 113 

are hungry, nr for wearing woollen cloth in the jrold season. To come nearer to Macaulay's 
the tvro before us : — Tho children who loam their letter* and a little elementary minute, 2nd Feb* 
arithmetic from the villus ^ohoolmaMer are not paid by him. Ho is paid for ^S35 — contd. 
t machine thenu Why thon is it nt'^^m* to pay people to loam Sanscrit and 
Arabic ? Kvidentlv bmni'f* it is wiiversallv felt that the Sanscrit and Arabic 
an* language^ the knowledge of which does not compensate for t He trouble of 
acquiring them. On nil Mich subjects tho Mate of the market is the decisive tost* 

Other evidence h not wanting, if other evidence were required. A petition 
vra^ printed lasit year to the commit to** by several ex-students of tho Sanscrit 
College, The petitioner* Mated that they had .studied in the college ten or twelve 
yew. that they had made themselves acquainted with Hindoo literature and 
science, that they had received certificates of proficiency* And what iMho fruit of 
all thi* ? "Notwithstanding Mich testimonials'* they say, 11 we have but lift lo 
prospect of bettering our condition without the kind assistance of your honourable 
committee, the indifference with which wc are generally looked upon by our 
countrymen leaving no hope of encouragement and assistance from them/' They 
therefore beg that they may be recommended to the Governor-General for places 
under the Government— not places of high dignity or emolument, but Mich n<r may 
juM enable them to cxiM. ** We want mean**/* they «iy, 14 for a decent living, and 
for our progressive improvement, which, however, we cannot obtain without tho 
n«-*i*tancc of Government, bv whom we have been educated and maintained from 
childhood/' They conclude by represent im: very pathetically that they are sure 
that if wa<* never the intention of Government, after behaving fo liberally to 
them during their education, to abandon them to destitution and neglect, 

I have been uwl to reo petitions to Government for compensation. All tho^e 
petition*, oven the most unreasonable of them, proceeded on the supposition 
that pom** Iom had been fu*?tnined, that fomo wrong had been indicted. Those 
nre surely the fir-t petitioner* who ever demanded compensation for having been 
educated gratis, for having been Supported by the public during twelve yenra, 
and then rent forth into the world well furnished with literature and science. They 
represent their education ns an injury which gives them a claim on the Govern- 
ment for redrew, a** an injury for which tho stipends paid to I hem during tho inflic- 
tion were a very inadequate compensation. And I doubt not that they arc in the 
right. They have waited tho best year* of life in learning what procure 1 * for them 
wither bread nor res-pert. Surely we might with advantage* have naved the cost 
of making th^e penonn useless and inerrable. Surety, men may bo brought tip 
to hi burden*? fo the public and objects of contempt to their neighbours at a Homo- 
what nnaller charge to the State, Jhil Mich in our policy. We tin not even Maud 
neuler in the content between I ruth and falsehood* Wo are not content* to loa^o 
(he native* to (he influence of their own hereditary prejudices To the natural 



114 Selections from Edttcational Records 

Macaidaifs difficulties which obstruct the progress of sound science in the East, we add great 
minute ) 2nd Feb. difficulties of our own making. Bounties and premiums, such as ought not to be 
1835— contd, given even for the propagation of truth, wo lavish on false texts and false philosophy. 

By acting thus we create the very evil which wo fear. We are making that 
opposition which we do not find. "What we spend on the Arabic and Sanscrit 
Colleges is not merely a dead loss to the cause of truth. It is bounty-money paid 
to raise up champions of error. It goes to form a nest not merely of helpless place- 
hunters but of bigots prompted alike by passion and by interest to raise a cry against 
every useful scheme of education. If there should be any opposition among the 
natives to the change which I recommend, that opposition will be the effect of our 
own system. It will be headed by persons supported by our stipends and trained 
in our colleges. The longer we persevere in our present course, the more formidable 
will that opposition be. It will be every year reinforced by recruits whom we 
are paying. From the native society, left to itself, we have no difficulties to 
apprehend. All the murmuring will come from that oriental interest which we 
have, by artificial means, called into being and nursed into strength. 

There is yet another fact which is alone sufficient to prove that the feeling 
of the native public, when left to itself, is not such as the supporters of the old 
system represent itfyo be. The committee have thought fit to lay out above a 
lakh of rupees in printing Arabic and Sanscrit books. Those books find 
no purchasers. It is very rarely that a single copy is disposed of. Twenty- three 
thousand volumes, most of them folios and quartos, fill the libraries or rather > 
the lumber-rooms of this body. The committee contrive to get rid of some portion 
of their vast stock of oriental literature by giving books away. But they cannot 
give so fast as they print. About twenty thousand rupees a year arc spent in 
adding fresh masses of waste paper to a hoard which, one should think, is already 
sufficiently ample. During the last three years about sixty thousand rupees have 
been expended in this manner. The sale of Arabic and Sanscrit books during 
thoso three years has not yielded quite one thousand rupees. In the meantime, 
the School Book Society is selling seven or eight thousand English volumes every 
year, and not only pays the expenses of printing but realizes a profit of twenty 
per cent, on its outlay. 

The fact that the Hindoo law is to be learned chiefly from Sanscrit books, 
and the Mahometan law from Arabic books, has been much insisted on, but 
seems not to bear at all on the question. We are commanded by Parliament to 
ascertain and digest the laws of India. The assistance of a Law Commission has 
been given to us for that purpose. As soon as the Code is promulgated the Sh asters 
and the Hedaya will be useless to a moonsifl or a Sudder Ameen, I hope and trust 
th^t, before the boys who are now entering at the Mudrassa and the Sanscrit College 
havs completed then studies, this great work will be finished. It would be mani- 





Macauhu/s Minute ii5 

festly absurd to educate the rising generation with a view to a state of things which Macaulays 

we mean to alter before thov reach manhood. * minute. 2nd Feb, 

^ _ 

But there is yet another argument which seems even more untenable. It con ^- 
is said that the Sanscrit and the Arabic are the languages in which the sacred 
books of a hundred millions of people are written, and that they are on that account 
entitled to peculiar encouragement. Assuredly it is the duty of the British Govern- 
ment in India to be not only tolerant but neutral on all religious questions. But 
to encourage the study of a literature, admitted to be of small intrinsic value, only 
because that literature inculcates the most serious errors on the most important 
subjects, is a course hardly reconcilable with reason, with morality, or even with 
that very neutrality which ought, as we all agree, to be sacredly preserved. It 
is confessed that a language is barren of useful knowledge. Wtf are to teach it 
because it is fruitful of monstrous superstitions, Wo are to teach false history, 
fahc astronomy, false medicine, because wc find them in company with a false 
religion. We abstain, and I trust shall always abstain, from giving any public 
encouragement to those who are engaged in the work of converting the natives 
to Christianity, And while we act thus, can we reasonably or decently bribe men, 
out of the revenues of the State, to waste their youth in learning how the)* arc to 
purify themselves aftei touching an ass or what texts of the Ycdas they are to 
lepeat to expiate the crime of killing a goat I 

It is taken for granted by the advocates of oriental learning that no native 
of this country can possibly attain more than a mere smattering of English. They 
do not attempt to prove this. But they perpetually insinuate it. They designate 
the education which their opponents recommend as a mere spelling-book educa- 
tion. They ashiime it as undeniable that the question is between a profound know- 
ledge of Hindoo and Arabian literature and science on the one side, and superficial 
knowledge of the rudiments of English on the other. This is not merely an 
assumption, but an assumption contrary to all reason and experience. We know 
that foreigners of all nations do learn our language sufficiently to have access to all 
the most abstruse knowledge which it contains sufficiently to relish even the more 
delicate graces of our most idiomatic writers. There are in this very town natives 
who are quite competent to discuss political or scientific questions with fluency 
and precision in the English language. I have heard the very question on which 
I am now writing discussed by native gentlemen with a liberality and an intelli- 
gence which would do credit to any member of the Committee of Public Instruc- 
tion- Indeed it is unusual to find, oven in the literary circles of the Continent, 
any foreigner who can express himself in English with so much facility and correct- 
ness as we find in many Hindoos. Nobody, I suppose, will contend that English 
is so difficult to a Hindoo as Greek to an Englishman, Yet an intelligent English 
youth, in a much smaller number of years than our unfortunate pupils pass at 




116 Selections from Educational Records 

Macaulay's the Sanscrit College, becomes able to read, to enjoy, and even to imitate not uil> 
minute, 2nd Feb. happily the compositions of the best Greek authors* Less than half the time which 
1835 — contd. enables an English youth to read Herodotus and Sophocles ought to enable a Hindoo 

to read Hume and Milton,* 

To sum up what I have said, I think it clear that we are not fettered by 
the Act of Parliament of 1813, that we are not fettered by any pledge expressed 
or implied, that we are free to employ our funds as we choose, that we ought to 
employ them in teaching what is best worth knowing, that English is better worth 
knowing than Sanscrit or Arabic, that the natives aTe desirous to be taught English, 
and are not desirous to be taught Sanscrit or Arabic, that neither as the languages 
of law nor as the languages of religion have the Sanscrit and Arabic any peculiar 
claim to our encouragement, that it is possible to make natives of this country 
thoroughly good English scholars, and that to this end our efforts ought to be 
directed. 

In one point I fully agree with the gentlemen to whose general views I am 
opposed. I feel with them that it is impossible for us, with our limited means, 
to attempt to educate the body of the people. We must at present do our best 
to form a class who may be interpreters between us and the millions whom we 
govern — a class of persons Indian in blood and colour, but English in tasfces, in 
opinions, in morals and in intellect. To that class we may leave it to refine the 
vernacular dialects of the country, to enrich those dialects with terms of science 
borrowed from the Western nomenclature, and to render them by degrees fit vehicles 
for conveying knowledge to the great mass of the population. 

I would strictly respect all existing interests, I would deal even generously 
with all individuals who have had fair reason to expect a pecuniary provision. 
But I would strike at the root of the bad system which has hitherto been 
fostered by us. I would at once stop the printing of Arabic and Sanscrit books. 
I would abolish the Mudrassa and the Sanscrit College at Calcutta. Benares is 
the great seat of Brahminical learning ; Delhi of Arabic learning. If we retain 
the Sanscrit College at Benares and the Mahometan College at Delhi we do enough 
and much more than enough in my opinion, for the Eastern languages. If the 
Benares and Delhi Colleges should be retained, I would at least recommend that 
no stipends shall be given to any students who may hereafter repair thither, 
but that the people shall be loft to make their own choice between the rival systems 
of education without being bribed by us to learn what they have no desire to know. 
; The funds which would thus be placed at our disposal would enable us to give larger 



* In 183B Mr. Macaulay himself examined tho students of the Hindu College. See J- Kerk. A 
Reincw of Public Instruction in Hie Bengal Presidency from 1835 to 1S51, II, P« 29. Ed, 



Macaulmjs Minnie 117 

encouragement to the Hindoo College at Calcutta, and establish in the principal Macauhtfs 
cities throughout the Presidencies of Fort William and Agra schools in which t\\v minute, 2nd Ftb. 
English language might be well and thoroughly taught* 1S35— concld. 

If the decision of His Lordship in Council should be such as I anticipate, 
I shall enter on the performance of my duties with the greatest zeal and alacrity. 
If, on the other hand, it be the opinion of the Government that the present system 
ought to remain unchanged, I beg that I may be permitted to retire from the chair 
of the Committee, I feel that I could not be of the smallest use there, I feel also 
that I should be lending my countenance to what I firmly believe to be a mere ^ 
delusion, I believe that the present system tends not to accelerate the progress 
of truth but to delay the natural death of expiring errors* I conceive that we have 
at present no right to the respectable name of a Board of Public Instruction. M T e 
are a Board for wasting the public money, for printing books which arc of less value 
than the paper on which they arc printed was while it was blank — for giving arti- 
ficial encouragement to absurd history, absurd metaphysics, absurd physics, absurd 
theology — for raising up a breed of scholars who find their scholarship an incum- 
brance and blemish, who live on the public while they are receiving their education, 
and whose education is so utterly useless to them that, when they have received 
it, they must either starve or live on the public all the rest of their lives. Enter* 
taining these opinions, I am naturally desirous to decline all share in the respon- 
sibility of a body which, unless it alters its whole mode of proceedings, I must 
consider, not merely as useless, but as positively noxious. 

T. B. MACAULAY. 

2nd February 183$. 

J give my entire concurrence to the sentiments expressed in this Minute. 

W. C. BENTINCK. 

(37) Note, dated tlic J 5th February 1835, by JL T. Prinscp {with marginal 

votes by Macaiday). 

It seems to me that there are some points touched upon in the Minute of the Prinscp' s note, 
Hon'blc 3Ir. Mncaulay that require to be set right by an explanation of the ]5th Fck 1S35. 
facts or by more clearly stating the views and principles against which the argu- 
ments of the minute are directed where these appear to have been misunderstood* 
For as the question before the Government is of the first importance and the proposi- 
ti 



Selections from Educational Records 



tions to which it leads such as if any step be taken hastily and without a thorough 
comprehension of the subject in its different bearings the Government may be 
committed irretrievably to measures hateful and injurious to the mass of the people 
under its sway such as it might repent afterwards when too late — it behoves every 
one that can contribute anything towards clearing it of fallacies or further elucidat- 
ing any of the material points to bring forward what he may have to say before 
rather than after the Government's determination is taken. My note will be short 
for I propose merely to point out where in the minute before Government the 
opposite view has not been fully stated or where the information built upon is 
incomplete or incorrect. It is not my purpose to make a laboured advocacy of 
the cause of oriental literature ; for neither my pursuits, inclinations nor acquaint- 
ance with the subject qualify me for such a task. . 

First in respect to the legal question. 

It is submitted that the Act 53 Geo. Ill must "be construed with special refer- 
ence to the intention of the Legislature of that day. So construed there cannot 
be a doubt in the mind of any person that by " the revival and promotion of 

w literature and the encouragement of learned natives " 

had tho^phS o^s^E^Ryan! legislature* did not mean to refer to any other 
He pronounces that there is not literature than native literature nor to any other 
MnK^ f ° r Mr * learned natives than such as were eminent by their 

T* B« M. proficiency in that literature. These were the persons 
I do not feol overwhelmed by tlien intended to be produced and encouraged and 
tins authority. [H T P] * s mvQ ^y f° rc * n g ^ e words out of their natural 

construction when it is argued that the revival 
of native literature can best be effected by abolishing all institutions for teach- 
ing the literature that then existed and that had existed for ages beforehand by 
communicating instruction only in English, 

With respect to the analogy to the position of the Pasha of Egypt there caij be 
no doubt that if he were to talk of reviving and promoting literature in that country 
his meaning would be the literature and h nguage hst existing in Egypt, viz., that 
borrowed from Arabia and accordingly we do see him cultivating and reviving 
that and teaching medicine and other sciences in that. The example is worthy 
of imitation. There is no talk there of reviving the mummy literature of Osiris 
nor in India of going beyond what we found prevailing throughout but languishing 
for want of encouragement. 

With respect to rescinding any provisions of the Charter act of 1813 by a 
legislative Act of the Indian Government I have before argued that question an<3 
it cannot be necessary to revert to it. 



Prinsep's note, 
15th Feb. 1835— 
contd. 



1 

AVe by //. T. /'niwc/J U!> 

*3Th»* m s \t point K that the Institution*' established for cnnnnunuMtnty inMrue* I*riuscp\i noK 
lion in Ar.thie and S\ui4;nt <*re endowments to which fund haw h***<t\ permanently /J'A MVJ — 
and irp-vo ,-ddy appropriated, Acahv-t thi^ it 1% argued t h*it tJnvermnent rnnnot contd^ 
haw pbdj^d ip*M to pr:p<tuaJe what may be proved w>\bms that there is no 

• I i 4 „ f , t .« Wr.i n*jK' vf r n>i« rty vrtina in iuiy body and that retjum> 

i'. !* <^ ^ * ii^h to he rc Pm t* d n %j ttrh*- * therefore thnt to take theM* 

1 "* ftinr} • from t!nv-e purport and object* and direct 
tin m t-» t»*. ?;+ - that iis iv be thnnidit bv the rul^rn of tit* 1 dav to be mop* bene* 
fi'-ni no *oi4:tfion or vto! ition of anv ir**vd tr.frrr^f but on thecontrarv that 
:h<* mimm! h-tUt of Km***-* r**t ;i0.irt bv th^Mu't of rarltrtiiicnt niav annimllv b«* 

it- V * 

♦ipjui* d h puipo**- , ;r» in \y e uh y*\x he thought uu^t conducive to the 
$:t^ a $tA -the p m\d and * nrouMcwent of lip*r<»tup' nnd tip* promotion and 
i 'tltivoti'-ti of ?v - i**nr*\ 

rjHiis thi* it to h<* ob^rv^l fit* t that the argument to the inwolabdity of 
• ndo*;r*M* w*v mwr ftpplnd tunny Institution paid out of the Parliamentary 
V?^n* of a Lat h of Knjw* x, It wa*> n<h!urrtl only in b< lmlf of the Mudn»a which 
v..*- <i > '<*dnallv mi <nd<ium<nt ond** bv WarpMi lla*tm;*~ mop* than fiftv war* 
uj** £\v.*l f*»r thr- support of sxhu h « * rt-ufi Fund', tiz f I he httirf rrtmur of the Mmirra 
Mnh d p-.?t of whuh i* oehuhd u\ thv Ilarritrkpnnf parh were fptc:ib%iny u^M^n^J 
At fit*? tJ ** Its*!:tuti*tn ; a+ \vh X** th** tin* ontTollwl niniKiii^iui nt i?f the Moohi plar<<! 
bv 3!r, lift Mn^' *t! i fi * lo-oh Th*- Mttfatl ho\\r\tr wrm tuub*r t)o^ Khro. nuiiMp*' 
to'ht i*f I5o \r*l of Hiacuu^ ntul t!o* xntyin^ ntn^uiU itMhrtil from it wan plmeil 
4*! th** i% r^** fbvpt^^h Stib*Mjto*ntJv tht* Miihul wa^ jn^'b* o\**r nt n 
J;un-i tfitht* iJcsjn nf JCinb**M wh^n u*^ iiv-tor^l to hn t^tat»-s of which t his fonncf! 
r* put* Kx<*pi thrji'fort* thnt the *hr< ct iiinnn^ein^nt of th** buuln wiu\ not m the 
h^r/l r **f lb'* I^5r*Mp^l and JVofr or* mid Ft How * thr (*olIrj;r thi^ \uh xoMJp'dly 
t\* io?op!M* 4 Hndtiwin^nt nny of the fnltc^r 1 * of Oxford nnd f^vtnlvrid^e or «s 
the* libw co( >0:^f1 in London tan of. Th^ ptujMMf wa» drdntcd to be 

tJ.'* fdst^tto'ii <ff M'Kda^T*^ find K«r^v- orul tht* cuhivatiou of Arabic barnnij:, 
ntid from th" d*y of tfa* Ir/litutionV br^t < ^ablt^hno'nt to thin prc.rnt tune di^reo 
SktA ^ertitl^it* ^ )j ivt^ brcji jrmnl^l uititlifif! pepon^ to mMJJiu* t 1m* .*>lylc nnd lo 
M.rfirr thn liw f ton of MtHiJrivc*' nnd Kar<<< i r t liho fnantnr a^ decree * of Master 
of Alt" and I)rw?or nt^ conf'TP'd in I-urnp*\ 

Th<* fJovrmin^nt t*\<n\m\ toward 1 * tht*t in^titutinn i)n* fnnciif>n^ * >f Wnqif 
or Mndov^r winch hp* distinct and well dcfui^t in law* and by the practice of thr 
Maititry p *^nbbn;i tlm^- of directing vi* It <ir but more extcteKe than any enjoyed 
by vi 'iP»r/* in Knrop'\ In tJo* wt ft*** of tlo power:* fltc tioverrwnent lmd reformed 
th** he*itution nnd pfaeed it on n footing rflieieni for the purpose* intended by the 
bniiebr Ujntr th«- Parliamentary grant of 1813 wns mad<\ It was transferred 

v '1 



, 1 " * * f 

120 Selections from Educational Records 

Prinsep's note, to the Committee appointed to carry that act into execution not as an Institution 
15th Feb. 1835 — established under it and paid from the funds appropriated therein to Education 
contd. but because the Committee was deemed the fittest organ for the execution of the 

functions of visitor* The Mudrusa had before a separate Committee which merged 
into the General Education Committee and therein the connexion of this latter 
with it. The argument therefore* that the Government is free to deal with its lakh 
as it pleases does not touch this particular Institution — the Government proceedings 
and determination in respect to which must be guided by specific reference to the 
conditions of its establishment and to its present position- If there be any thing 
positively noxious in the existence of a seminary of this kind that of course may 
be an argument for correcting what is bad or if the mischief be past correction for 
abolishing root and branch the irredeemable evil. But surely Government is not 
yet prepared to put forth a declaration that such is the light in which it regards 
the instruction of all its subjects of the Mooslim faith — of this however more 
presently* 

With respect to the argument that the Government cannot be pledged to 
perpetuate any course of instruction for that it has created no property and there 
is no one that can pretend to possess a vested interest. This, in so far as it denies 
to collegiate institutions a right which I believe in Europe they have always stoutly 
asserted and hitherto maintained, is a question that may be left to be battled by 
the Universities in England. Nothing on earth can hope to be perpetual and 
property of every kind is of itself the most mutable of things. By the hand of 
time, by the act of God, by foreign violence or internal convulsion everything niosfc 
prized and most valued may be swept away in an instant. To all these sources 
of ruin to vested interests must be added the changeful opinions of ma.nkind and 
the caprices of those who rule* The Government doubtless may set up and abolish 
Institutions with the same facile rapidity with which it creates and abolishes offices 
and passes acts and Regulations. The question is one of wisdom and expediency. 
Is it wise and beneficial for a Government so to act as to destroy the hope that 
what is, and has been, will be lasting 1 Does not every Government on the con- 
trary derive strength and influence from encouraging its subjects to look upon 
certain classes of its actions as permanent and binding upon itself and its succes- 
sors ? The establishment of such an Institution as the Mudrusa is most assuredly 
an act of this description and class — and in every part of the world when the ruling 
Power has made an appropriation of funds or through other means established, a 
Seminary of the kind for Education whether it be to teach Latin and Greek or to 
teach English to the ^Catholic uneducated Irish or for any purpose of supposed 
utility the appropriation has been respected and held sacred by those who have 
followed. It is only in this country that it would be proposed not to improve and 
make perfect and correct errors in the Institutions already established by the 



Note by E. T. Prinsep l2l 

lihctality of those who have gone before, but upon a vague impression that the Prinscp's note, 
object is not beneficial wholly to abolish and dissolve them* 15th Feb. 7835 

In behalf of the Mudrusa more claim to permanency has not been asserted contd. 
than is allowed elsewhere to similar Institutions and Seminaries* Let it be dealt ' 
with as a charity school or college of England liable to fall to corruption and to need 
the hand of the governing power to correct its abuses and reform its practise, 
nay even to suit it to the advancing opinions of the day. The proposition for its 
abolition goes a great deal further. 

The minute assuming apparently the Mudrusa to be one of the Institutions 
supported out of the Lakh of rupees appropriated by Parliament proceeds to the 
question what is the most useful mode of employing that fund. It is laid down 
that the vernacular dialects are not fit to be made the vehicle of instruction in 
science or literature, that the choice is therefore between English on one hand and 
Sanscrit and Arabic on the other— the latter arc dismissed on the ground that their 
literature is worthless and the superiority of that of England is set forth in an 
animated description of the treasures of science and of intelligence it contains and 
of the stores of intellectual enjoyment it opens. There is no body acquainted with 
both literatures that will not subscribe to all that is said in the minute of the superio- 
rity of that of England but the question is not rightly stated when it is asserted 
to be tliis " whether, when it is in our power to teach this language that is Eng- 
lish — we shall teach those which contain no books of value. The whole question is— 
have wc it in our power to teach everywhere this English and this European 
science ? It is in doubting nay in denying this that those who take the opposite 
view maintain the expediency of letting the natives pursue their present course 
of instruction and of endeavouring to engraft European Science thereon. 

An analogy is drawn between the present state of India and that of Europe at 
the time of the revival of letters. The cultivation of English is likened to the study 
of Latin and Greek in those days and the grand results that have followed are hold 
out as an example to bo imitated hereby inculcating English in order that a Bengalee 
and Ilindcc literature may grow up as perfect as that we now have in England. 
Tliis however is not the true analogy— Latin and Greek wcro to tho nations of Europe 
what Arabic and Persian are to the Mooslims and Sanscrit to tho Hindoos of the 
present population of Ilindoostan and if a native literature is to be created it must 

tit cannot bo mo™ «trnngo bo through tho improvements of which those arc 
timn Greek vtak to Utu subjects capable To tho great body of the People of India 
of ifcnxy tho Eighth. ^ ^ BngYmh is as strange as Arabic was to tho knights of 

tho dark ages/j* It is not tho language of the erudite 



* 1'ngo 110. 



J 



122 Selections from Educational Records 

Prinsep's note, of tlie clergy and of men of letters as Latin always was in Europe and as Arabic 
15th Feb. 1835 — and Persian are extensively in Asia, 

con ^* The analogy of Russia is less convincing.* It is through communication with 

*^ ™ . foreigners through imitation and translations that 

*Not the fact* The Russian . ° . ~ . mi • 

v educated class has acquired all the Russians are buildmg up a native literature, ihis 

that it knows by means of English, j s ^ e mo thod that is specifically advocated by those 

French, German, etc* From the - , * i • n t i .i i r 

English, French and German it is who despair of making English the language ot 
now beginning to imitate and to general adoption or the vehicle for imparting a 

translate. This is exactly the .° ... * . M1 . A , 

course which I hopo and trust * knowledge or the sciences to the millions who com- 
that the educated class of our pose ^ population .of India. The argument would 

native subjects will follow* x 1 _ • Ljr , fl , , t lt 

[T. B. M.] only have weight if, in the schools and colleges 

of Russia, German were now or had ever been the 
exclusive organ through which the youth of that country derived instruction 
which it assuredly is not and never was. 

But to proceed to the real arguments of the minute. It is said that in teaching 
Arabic and Sanscrit we are not consulting the intellectual taste of the natives but 
are " forcing on them the mock learning which they nauseate."f If there were 

the slightest ground for believing that the great 

% Men may have a great vencra- , ^ r „ ° „ ^ , , . 

tion for a language and not wish body of the Moosmns did not venerate to enthusiasm 
to learn it. I have seen Rhada- ^ lG [ v Arabic and Persian literature! or to believe 

cant Deb since the last council. . - - . n 7 i , ,i « 

Ho tells mo that no body in India that the Hindoos as a body were not partial to tneir 
studies Sanscrit profoundly Sanscrit then of course would the whole case or 

without being paid to do so. T ^ t f1 - , , „ 

Men of fortune Icam a little those who advocate the prosecution of those studies 
superficially. But ho assures req uire to be thrown up. This however is a nfatter 

me that to tho best of his belief -ic - ■ .1 , j i jj-l 

there is not, even at Ecnares, a of fact and of opinion that cannot be conceded to 
single Etudent of the higher either party upon mere assertion* It is necessary 

Sanscrit learning who is not paid, . * 1 1 • i 1. j.r 

[T B i M 3 examine the grounds upon which so startling a 

a proposition as that above stated is advanced 
and maintained. 

The minute proceeds " This is proved by the fact that we tiro forced to pay our 

Arabic and Sanscrit students while those who learn English pay us We 

cannot find in all our vast empire a single student who will let us teach him those 
dialects unless we will pay him/*§ 

These assertions are supported by adducing from the report upon the Mudrusa 
of Calcutta the circumstance that there were in December 1833 seventy seven 
Arabic Students on that foundation receiving in the aggregate above Us. 500 per 



t Page 112. 
§ Pago 1 12* 



1 



* 



Note by H. T. Prinsep 123 

mensem while in three months Bs. 103 were collected by the English master from Prinsep's note. 
out-students who paid for his instruction in that language. The contrast is dwelt IS'h Feb. 1835 
upon as conclusive but a very little explanation will Suffice to show that the argu- con td. 
ment is quite groundless. 

There are ordinarily taught in the Mudrusa between two and three hundred 
youths. The Government scholarships are eighty and if the President of the Educa- 
tion Committee would attend the next examination of candidates for these scholar- 
ships he would see in the keenness of the competition and in the proficiency of the 

candidates abundant evidence that the salaried 
«m loured thS"^ scholars are not the only persons in our Indian Empire 

the name of a learned Arabic w ho learn the rudiments of Persian* and Arabic 

literature. I am no Sanscrit scholar and never 
acknowledge my own ignorance attended the examinations of that college in Calcutta 
on the subject, [T B M ] nor ^° * P retenc ^ to muc ^ acquaintance with its 

constitution or with the rules under which its scholar- 
ships are given away but only the other day the Education Committee received 
a report of the examinations of the Sanscrit College at Benares and it cannot have 
escaped the president of that Committee to have observed that, although the 
jageers or scholarships were only 130, upwards of three hundred students pressed 
forward for examination. 

In truth the jageers or monthly allowances given at the Mudrusa and in the 
Sanscrit Colleges and elsewhere are in all respects similar to the Scholarships of the 
Universities or to the foundation Scholars of the Public Schools of England, They 
are given not as inducements to study the language but as the rewards of success- 
ful study and in order to keep at the institution for the prosecution of further studies 
those who by their progress evince a love of science and the qualification to 
become learned men, Moolavces or Pundits. Most of those who enjoy these jageers 
are themselves the teachers of many pupils, teachers in the college to those who 
attend there for instruction and teachers at home in families of the bettor order 
to those who prefer that their sons shall be so instructed. 

Whether it is expedient or not to give these stipendiary provisions as rewards 
for ardent study and to keep students longer at their education by means of them 
is a question that has heretofore been argued in the Committee of Public Instruc- 
tion. Something is to be said on both sides and although the Committee hereto- 
fore decided in favour of the practise it does not follow that they may not have 
decided wrong. But however this may be the fact that thero are paid scholars 
on the establishment or foundation of any seminary affords no ground for assuming 
that none would learn if they were not paid, yet this is the argument of the minute. 
^Vs well might it be assumed from the fact that there are foundation scholars rvt 



124 Selections from Educational Records 

Prinsep's note, Eton and scholarships in all the Colleges of both Universities in England that no 
IStli Feb. 1835— body would learn Latin and Greek if it were not for these stipendiary advantages, 
contd. Be it Latin and Greek or Mathematics or Law or Arabic and Sanscrit literature 

or be it English the principle is the same. Scholarships axe given and it is thought 
right to give them to reward and encourage the poor scholar and to load as well 
through the excitement of competition as by lengthening the course of study to 
the attainment of higher proficiency* In the Mudrusa itself separate scholarships 
have been established for proficients in English in order to encourage the btudy 
of that language. If this be a conclusive argument that the study of English is 
nauseated because it requires to be paid for, then may it be applied to Arabic and 
Sanscrit and to Mathematics and to all other studies. All must participate in 
the reproach or it will evidently apply to none. 

But the fact remains to be explained that a sum of Es. 103 was collected in 
three months from out students of English whereas nothing is shown by the accounts 
of the Mudrusa to have been collected from out students of Persian and Arabic, 
Everybody knows that with Moolavees and Pundits, for both profess the same 
principle in this respect, it is meritorious to give instruction gratis and sinful to take 
hire or wages from the pupil who receives it. The teacher's remuneration is always 
tmL . „ ^ 4 in the way of a present and perfectly voluntary,* 

* The sum, if the accounts arc _ _ J 1 { J . J 

rightly drawn up, is paid to tlio -Lhe Jinglisn Master on the other hand who is a 

CoUegMot directly to the master, Christian and who has been appointed by the Corn- 
so that the explanation is detcc- , thjtt * 

tivo. mittee to the Mudrusa acts on quite different 

[T* B. M.] principles and not only deems it no sin to take pay- 

Collcgo Funds. This is all I demand of it from all who appear to him to have 
meant to state. the means of paying. The wonder is rather, consi- 

dering that the teacher in this instance is a first rate 
instructor and that he gives instruction to Hindoos as well as Mooslims, that 
more was not realized. The fact that a Sum of about 'Rs. 30 a month was 
realized when upwards of three hundred per mensem is paid from the Committee's 
funds to the Schoolmaster is surely no proof of the violent desire for instruction 
in English which is inferred from it. If again the desire of this instruction were 
so great how comes it to have been proposed to make the learning of English com- 
pulsory in the Mudrusa and how does it happen that of all the students now in 
the Mudrusa there are but two who have made progress beyond the spelling 
book. 

Undoubtedly there is a very widely spread anxiety at this time for the attain- 
ment of a certain proficiency in English, The sentiment is to be encouraged by 



Note by E. T. Prinsep * 125 

all means as the source and forerunner of great moral improvement to those who Prinsep* s note, 

* Thero is no ood En ^lisli * ee ^ ^ s ™^ uence ^ut *h ere is no single member of l&k & 1835- 
school for the n Mus5uhnans" g and the Education Committee who will venture to c °ktd, 

Hslio°ne°" r ^ dUti0S " *° aSserfc ***** disposition hag yet shown itself 

[T B M] Pensively amongst the Moosulmans.* It is the 

Hindoos of Calcutta, the Sirkars and their connexions 
and the descendants and relations of the Sirkars of former days, those *who have 
risen through their connexion yfnth the English and with public offices, men who 
hold or who seek employments in which a knowledge of English is a necessary 
qualification. These are the classes of persons to whom the study of English is 
as yet confined and certainly we have no reason yet to believe that the Moosul- 
mans in any part of India can be reconciled to the cultivation of it much less give 
it a preference to the polite literature of their race or to what they look upon 
as such. 

The minute proceeds to cite a petition from certain students of the Sanscrit 
College complaining that their studies did not secure them an assured and easy 
livelihood as affording another conclusive argument against extending encourage- 
ment to such studies. But surely the disappointment of the too sanguine hopes 
of any class of persons as to their future provision in life affords no evidence that 
the knowledge they have acquired is useless* Much research and patient investi- 
gation would be indispensible before any determination could be come to on the 
important question to native youth at this moment how best to secure respect 
in after life and by what course ot education to provide themselves the best chance 
of a comfortable livelihood. In all times and amongst all people this is an important 
question for youth but more especially to the youth of India at present when society 
with all its institutions is so evidently in the transition state. This argument 
again even were it sound as respects the study of Sanscrit has evidently no appli- 
cation to the Mudrusa and to those who study Arabic and Persian, These at least 
have never complained that through proficiency in their studies their moans of 
obtaining a livelihood have not been improved nor will it be maintained that the 
study of both is not at this moment highly useful for this great purpose of life. 

But the great argument remains to be noticed and that is that by encouraging 
the study of native literature we create the very opposition which is adduced as 
the chief obstacle to the introduction of the study of English and of true science. 
This is a most important question but seems to involve the previous one — does or 
does not the prejudice exist ? It is declared by those who take the opposite view 
to Mr. Macaulay that it does exist and that the prejudice is so general especially 
amongst the Moosulmans that there is no hope of our being able by the mere offer 
of instruction in English and English science to secure that it shall be received for 



* 



Note by H. T. Prinsep 127 

and translating a profitable speculation that therefore there is no taste for the Prinsep's note, 

literature. Our prices have been exorbitant and 15th Feb. 1835* 
the cSbrated e wte in the our ^ T ° r ks* childish or ill got up\ This alone accounts cont<i * 
Sanscrit language. for their not being taken off our hands and as for 

L * " "j the fact that private Printing establishments find a 
profit in printing English School Books they have had the extensive patronage 
of the Committee and of Mofusil institutions and more especially of Missionary 
schools and a growing Christian population to provide. Besides which the rela- 
tive expense of printing in the native languages as compared with that of printing 
in English will of itself account for the difference. Our books be it observed 
have been mostly printed at the same press which is referred to as having 
thrived by its printing business and it has thrived mainly at our expense. 

. However there is not I believe in the Committee 

tl rejoice to hear it. For r t v • . * 1 i jj» 

within the last few weeks several of public instruction a single advocate for a COn- 
minutcs have been recorded which tinuance of the printing and translating business 

would have led me to form a very t * - i • i i i 

different opinion. ou t* 10 f ootmg on which it has hitherto been con- 

[T. B. M.] ducted*f It has been ruinously expensive and has 

if wo print anything wo ought yielded no return but we see establishments for 

to print the Surya Sidhant and printing Persian and Arabic books as thriving as N 

the books that havo been pro- 1 i -r* t 1 i i ?* 1 

posed but I am perfectly ready the English Presses and numberless books and little 
to give up all printing, ^ ^ treatises are issued from them of which we hear 

nothing. The text book of the Moolavees who 
recently rose in insurrection is an instance in point. Although printed in 
Calcutta it was not heard of by Europeans until the sect broke out into rebellion. 

If our translations and the books of our selection have not hit the taste of 
the reading classes or have been too dear for them to purchase it is a reason for 
discontinuing the provision of such but no proof that there is no taste for 
anything that might be provided. There are applications in abundance for our 
books as presents and we know not when one is issued how many copies are 
made from it at less cost even than that we ask to compensate the charge of 
publication. The price too paid by the Committee for native publications is the 
first subscription price and the Committee is always undersold by the presses 
which supply them books for they sell the reserved copies at a reduced price. 

The minute proceeds to say that it cannot .be necessary to keep up instruc- 
tion in Arabic and Sanscrit because of the connection of these languages with the 
religion of the Hindoos and Mooslims. I have never heard this reason assigned} 

as an argument for a Christian Government's con- 
assigned, \r\ distmctly tinuing to give the instruction- The circumstance 

has been referred to as both "proving and accounting 
for the confirmed veneration these classes have for their respective literatures and 

s 2 



128 Selections from Educational Records 

Prinsep's note, because it has sometimes been denied that the natives have any respect for their 
15tk Feb, 1835— own literature which is quite inconsistent with the idea that all their religion is 
contd. wrapped up in it. 

It is on account of the connection of these languages with existing laws that 

* Surely it would be most tte n eces fty ° f continuing instruction in them has 
unreasonable to educate a boy of been maintained. This argument is met in the 

ST ££ V'Sngs fi S g h h wo H*»te *7 reference to what the Law Commission 
fully purpose to alfcer by tho are expected to do and what the Legislature intends 

time that ho is five and twenty. shou]d fee ^ * Herein towey?r ig an Emission 

[T. B. i ,] for so long as this intention is unfulfilled the 

motive for continuing instruction in that which is the law, exists in full force. - 

The nature of the instruction in English that will have to be imparted is the 
next point. Those opposed to the discontinuance of instruction in Sanscrit, Arabic 
and Persian maintain that in place of them the Committee would have to commence 
everywhere teaching the English alphabet. It cannot surely be denied that this 
must be the beginning. The minute dwells on the capability of the natives to 
attain high proficiency- This may be admitted as a result to be expected here- 
after but if the teaching of English be substituted everywhere for the per- 
fecting of youths in their present courses of education does it not follow as 

a necessary consequence that we shall have to sub- 

f Of course every body must ... . o , -i. r ji i i i i i it* 

begin a language at the beginning, statute the teaching of the alphabet and spelling 
Tho only question is whether we hook for instruction in advanced literature % The 

may reasonably expect in a t i i n • • • . i i • -in *^ 

few years to make an intelligent candidates for admission into our Arabic and Sanscrit 
native youth a thoroughly good Colleges know already much of those languages and 

English scholar. And I do not tjij i i • mi Tit 

now find that this is disputed. are prepared to be taught science. The students 

[T, B. M.] we should get for English would require to be taught 

to read.f 

To the recapitulation at the close of the Minute I have nothing new to object. 
It is admitted that we must endeavour to carry the people with us in all we seek 
to do for their improvement. The party whose sentiments I am endeavouring 
to express argue to the question what are the best, indeed to their minds the only 
means of doing this* Their opponents,looking to grand results to follow when all the 
desired improvements have been effected, pass over altogether the necessary consi- 
deration of means. Ofter volo jubeo is their policy on this great question. The aboli- 
tion of the Mudrusa and Sanscrit College at Calcutta and the alteration of the 
character of all other Institutions supported or assisted from the Public funds is their 
proposition but it is submitted that there are many considerations which should 
protect the Mudrusa at least from any present demolition. It is the only link 
through which the Government has at present any connection whatsoever with the 
instruction of the Mooslim youth of Bengal, it is not one of the passing institutions of 



1 



Note by H. T* Prins&p 129 

recent establishment for the support of which funds are assigned from the Pariia- Prinsep's note, 
mentary lack of Rupees but is an old established college endowed separately and 15th Feb. 1835 
efficiently performing the purposes of the endowment. If this be doubted let the — concld. 
fact be made the subject of enquiry the more searching the better will the advocates 
of this institution be satisfied. Even though the Committee of General Instruc- 
tion should come to a resolution or should be desired by Government to change 
altogether the principles by which ix> has hitherto been guided in the application 
of the Parliamentary grant, it would by no means follow that the Mudrusa should 
be placed on a different footing. The Moosulman subjects of the Government 
are much more jealous of innovation upon their habits and their religion than the 
Hindoos ever were. When it was first proposed to teach them English they con- 
sulted their oracle of the day Uzeezooddeen of Dehlee as to whether it was sinful 
to yield to the innovation. He gave them a most sensible answer and since then 
not only has English and English science been extensively taught but much progress 
has been made in instilling correct moral principles and reconciling the sect to further 
improvements. Such a measure at this time as the abolition of the Mudrusa would 

produce alienation in this wide class of the population ^instead of aiding would 

impede if it did not prevent any further improvement. To the principle of concilia- 
tion it is decidedly opposed and will universally be looked upon as touching close 
upon intolerance. 

I have written much more than I had intended or thought would be necessary 
and yet feci that I have not half stated all that I have myself to urge on 
this important question. The cause has many advocates who also deserve to be 
heard before Government shall come to a final determination. There is a minute ' 
by Sir, Macnaghten about to be sent up by the Education Committee which seems 
entitled to much attention and I am sure that not only that gentleman but every 
member of the Committee would wish to be heard upon any resolution passed for % 
abolishing the Mudrusa. In the height of the discussion as to the proper course 
to be followed by the Committee for promoting the improvement of the educa- 
tion of the country such a proposition was never brought forward by an) r one of 
those most opposed to the continuance of instruction in Arabic and Sanscrit. It 
is now submitted separately and it is my hope that I have shown sufficient ground 

to induce the Members of Government to suspend their judgment at least 

< + of investigation. 

H. T. PRINSEP. 

Sunday, 15th February 1835, 



*a Original 4 torn. 
t Original torn. 




n 



130 Selections from Educational Records 

I retain (not only)* unshaken but confirmed (in all my) opinions on the general 
question. I may have committed a slight mistake or two as to (details), and I 
may have occasionally used an epithet which might with advantage (have been) 
softened down. But I do not retract the substance of a single proposition I have 
advanced. 

[T. B. M/j 



7 



(32) {Lord B&ainch's) Resolution of the 7th March 1835. 

Resolution, On the 7th of March 1835 the following Eesolution f was issued :— 

1 1 March 1835. « ^j ie Governor-General of India in Council has attentively considered the 

two letters from the ' Secretary to the Committee of Public Instruc- 
tion, dated the 21st and 22nd January last, and the papers referred 
to in them 4 

First — His Lordship in Council is of opinion, that the great object of the 
British Government ought to be the promotion of European 
literature and science among the natives of India ; and that all the 
funds appropriated for the purpose of education would be best 
employed on English education alone. 
d. — But it is not the intention of His Lordship in Council to abolish any 
College or School of native learning, while the native population shall 
appear to be inclined to avail themselves of the advantages which 
it affords, and His Lordship in Council directs that all the existing 
professors and students at all the institutions under the superzn* 
> tendence of the Committee ghall continue to receive their stipends. 

But his Lordship in Council decidedly objects to the practice which 
has hitherto prevailed of supporting the students during the period 
of their education. He conceives that the only effect of such a system 
can be to give artificial encouragement to branches of learning which, 
in the natural course of things, would be superseded by more useful 
studies ; and he directs that no stipend shall be given to any student 
that may hereafter enter at any of these institutions ; and that wheh < 
any professor of Oriental learning shall vacate his situation, the 



* The original is torn down the middle and the words in brackets arc, conjectural- (Ed.) ^ 
t Printed in (1) Comekons Address to Parliament f pp, S1-S2 ; (2) Madras Selections, II, 1655, pp. 
txxxiiUtexxiv. 

J Documents Nos. 28 and 29* 



4 



Lord Bentinck's Resolution 



131 



Committee shall report to the Government the number and state Resolution, 
of the class in order that the Government may be able to decide upon 7th March 
the expediency of appointing a successor. ' 1835 — concld. 

Third. — It has come to the knowledge of the Governor-General in Council 
that a large sum has been expended by the Committee on the printing 
of Oriental works ; his Lordship in Council directs that no portion 
of the funds shall hereafter be so employed. 

Fourth. — His Lordship in Council directs that all the funds which these 
reforms will leave at the disposal of the Committee be henceforth 
employed in imparting to the antive populotion a knowledge of 
English literature and science through the medium of the English 
language ; and His Lordship in Council requests the Committee to 
submit to Government, with all expedition, a plan for the accom- 
plishment of this purpose. 



4 



r 



CHAPTER VII. 

The Orientalists' point of view. / 

But the controversy was not dead. Nor was Lord Bentinck's 
' resolution to stand unchallenged. It was too revolutionary. An 
interesting extract from the diary of II. T. Prinsep, the protagonist 
of the Orientalists, shows the state of public feelings. It is printed as 
document No. 33. In a minute of the 20th May 1835, he attacked 
Macaulay's views and the resolution (document No. 34). Meanwhile, 
on the 11th of April 1835, the Committee of Public Instruction had 
adopted certain propositions, among which one (accepted by the Gov- 
ernment) was in favour of the establishment of the schools "for the 
teaching of English literature and sciences through the medium of the 
English language." It was proposed to make a begimiing at Patna 
and Dacca. The papers are printed as documents Nos. 35 and 36. 



(33) Extract from the Diary of H. 2\ PrinsepJ* 

H. T. Prt?isep f s I shall not attempt to describe in detail all that was done by the Governor- 
diaty. Generalf during the short period of his stay in Calcutta, after his return from Oota- 

camund, but shall confine myself to two or three matters of my own departments 
in which I was a principal actor. The first was connected with the measures for 
the promotion of education among the natives. The Government had commenced, 
as I have stated, with the endeavour to incorporate instruction in the sciences of 
Europe and in English literature upon the foundation of the native institutions 
which existed for teaching the vernacular languages and Sanskrit literature to 
Hindus or that of Arabic and Persian to Muhammadans. There was, however, 
a class of Anglo-Indians and the younger civil servants mostly joined it, who were 
opposed to Government's assisting to give instruction in any kind of Eastern litera- 



* TnlS65howrotoftn autobiographical sketch of lib official life, which, howevor, ho did not 
publish. {Die. NaL Siog. xvi, -p. The following extract was supplied by Sir E. D. Jtos3 

t Lord WiUaitn Bontinck- Prinsop is most screro on Lord Bentinck, whom ho regarded as unduly 
auspicious and meddlesome, but to whom ho gives credit for honesty of intention. 

( 132 ) 



H. T. Prinsep's diary. 133 

ture or science, tlie whole of which they declared to be immoral, profane or non- B. T. Pritiseps 
sensicaL They especially attacked the Sanskrit mythology and in this they were diary — contd. 
aided of course by the missionaries, but the use of Persian in our courts and in the 
correspondence of the Governor- General was also an object of their antipathy. 
It had been yielded to this party during Lord Bentinck' s administration to require 
the law courts' proceedings to be recorded in the vernacular language of the several 
districts instead of uniformly in Persian in all districts. Several of this party were 
now in the Council of Education when I retook my place therein after my return 
from Tasmania, and I found there a contest to be raging whether in the Calcutta 
Madrassa and other institutions maintained by Government, English should be 
preferentially taught and the study of that language made obligatory on all or as 
hitherto be left optional under the inducement of the benefit in after life which the 
knowledge of it would confer. I took part of course against the innovations which 
this party wanted to introduce, and I carried with me the vote of the majority 
of the Council of Education. But when T. B. Macaulay arrived to be the new 
legislative member of the Council of India, his high literary reputation induced 
the Government to appoint him President of the Council of Education, and the 
English party, as it was called, entertained high hope that his influence and author- 
ity would turn the scale against me and my supporters. He was a mere silent 
observer, however, for some time, until Lord W. Bentinck had resumed his place 
at the seat of Government, then one day without mooting the matter at all in the 
Council of Education, he prepared an elaborate Minute proposing not only to with- 
hold any further grant of public money from institutions for conferring instruction 
in native literature of any kind, but even to abolish the existing Sanskrit and Mad- 
rassa colleges to which Government had made grants many years ago, that of the 
Madrassa dating from the time of Warren Hastings. This Minute T. B. Macaulay 
gave to Lord W. Bentinck at Barrackpur, the .Governor-General's country-house. 
Lord William sent it down to me (the Educational being one of my Secretariat De- 
partments) with a short note written at the foot adopting it and desiring it to be Jmt 
in train to be brought before Council. I accordingly circulated it in a box in the 
usual form. The box was returned to me without a note or memorandum of any 
kind from any of the Members. I accordingly considered it my duty to prepare 
and circulate a memorandum explaining the nature of the institutions proposed 
to be abolished, and giving reasons why they should hesitate to adopt the extreme 
views propounded by MrfMacaulay. This memorandum I sent up to the Governor- 
General and it was afterwards circulated to the Members of the Council from whom - 
it elicited separate short minutes of their opinions. These discussions of course were 
confidential, and were by me communicated to nobody. But somehow the report 
got wind that the Government was about to abolish the Madrassa and Sanskrit 
Colleges. The mind of the public of Calcutta was immediately in a ferment. In 



134 . Selections from Educational Records 

H. T. Prinsep's three clays a petition was got up signed by no less than 30,000 people in behalf of 
diary— conclcL the Madrassa and another by the Hindus for the Sanskrit College. T. B* Macaulay 

took it into his head that this agitation was excited and even 'got up by me. He 
sent for the Head of the Madrassa who of course was the recognised promoter of 
the Muhanmiedan petition, and questioned him upon the subject, using fox inter- 
preter John Colvin, a junior civil servant, who was in the Council of Education and 
of the party opposed to me. He particularly asked him whether lie had obtained 
from me or from my office the knowledge of its being the intention of Government 
to do anything with the Madrassa* The Hafiz (as the head teacher-of the Madrassa 
was called) answered decidedly in the negative. After this examination he Game 
to me to tell me what had passed : upon hearing it I asked from whom he had got 
the inf ormation, when he told me it was from John Cohan himself who had acted 
as interpreter, for he had been at Barrackpur when 5\ B. Macaulay presented his 
Minute to Lord W. Bentinck, and there learning that it was adopted- by the 
Governor-General had come back elate at the triumph of his party, and could not 
help boasting of it to the people of the College. 

When the subject came under consideration in Council, there was a very hot 
argument between myself and Mr. Macaulay. The issue was the resolution that 
was published not abolishing existing colleges, but requiring them to teach English 
as well as native literature and making the former obligatory, also giving some 
encouragement to vernacular studies, but declaring that aU Government pecuniary 
aid in future should be given exclusively to promote the study of European science 
through the medium of the English language Lord W. Bentinck^would not even 
allow my memorandum to be placed on record. He said it vfas quite an abuse 
that Secretaries should take upon themselves to write memorandums ; that it was 
enough for the Court of Directors to see what the Members of Council chose to 
place on record ; that what the Secretaries wrote was nothing unless adopted by 
the Government. Thus ended this matter for the time. v The Resolution passed 
on this occasion was modified afterwards and made a little more favourable for the 
old native institutions by Lord Auckland, but English has ever since been the study 
preferentially encouraged by Government in connection with vernacular literature. 
The study of Sanskrit, Arabic and Persian is, in consequence, less cultivated than 
heretofore, but none of the old institutions have been altogether abolished. 



{34) Minute by H. T. Frms&p, dated the 20lh May-1835. 

H T P«W«\ At tlie meeting of the Council when the letter of the Secretary to the com- 
Mim^OthMm, mittee of PubHc Instruction forwarding the Minute of Mi>W. H. Macnaghten was 
1835 ' l aid befoTe 118 to* 3 resolved by the majority not to reconsider the resolutions 



k. 



Minute hj IL T. Prinsep 135 

passed by the late Governor-General in Council on the 7th March last but to allow //. T. Prinsep* $ 
them to stand as the rules lor the guidance of the Committee in their future pro- Mi mile ,20lh May 
ccedings. My voice aud vote were with the minority on this occasion, and, as I contd. 
think the question of the first importance concerning deeply the character and 
credit of the Government, and look upon the decision that has been passed as 
calculated to alienate the affections of all the influential classes of the population 
and to do infinite injury in other respects 1 am not content to give a silent vote. 

It is laid down in the resolution above referred to that " the great object of the 
British Government ought to be the promotion of European literature and science " 
and u that all hinds appropriated to purposes of education would be best employed 
on English education alone." Leaving, however, all existing professors and stu- 
dents in seminaries* of oriental literature now supported by Government in posses- 
sion of their stipends it is ordered that no scholarships or stipends shall hereafter 
be given to students ; and, upon a vacancy occurring in any oriental professorship, 
a special report is to be made to Government upon the number and condition of the 
class, (so) that the Government may decide whether it .shall be continued* No 
funds arc to be expended hereafter in printing oriental works, and all the funds left 
at the disposal of the Committoe by the discontinuance of oriental prof essorships, 
scholarships- and printing arc to be devoted to the teaching of English literature 
and science, through tlx; medium of the English language. 

This resolution is looked upon by Mr, Macnaghten and by those who think with 
him in the Committee as containing a hostile declaration against the literature of the 
country inconsistent with past and with recent professions of the Government, as 
proclaiming a principle unfair and illiberal in itself and calculated to set against 
us thov* without who>c co-operation wc can do nothing to promote science and 
literature, and as ordering an entire change in the course of proceedings pursued 
hitherto by the Committee with eminent success ; such a change too has rendered 
it impo^iblc that the same men, whose influence and exertions in the Committee 
and weight of character in the country have mainly contributed to that success, 
tdtould continue to act as members, thus depriving the cause of public instruction 
of all the aid derived from th^ir talents and information and marking in the face 
of the world that a course is about to be pursued which they cannot reconcile with 
their ideas of fairness and propriety. This however is not alt ; Mr. Macnaghten 
refers to the Act of Parliament which made the assignment of funds the appropria- 
tion of which has been trusted to this Committee, lie there finds that " the revival 
and promotion of literature " amongst the natives of India and " the encouragement 
of learned men" arc specifically indicated as the objects first to be provided for 
from the fund* assigned lie doubts not, and neither can any one that reads the 
provision and refers to the proceedings that occurred when it passed, doubt that the 
literature meant to bo so revived and encouraged was the literature of the two 

T 2 



136 Selections om Educational Records 

Pritisep's great classes of tlie population, the Moosiilmans and the Hindoos. Of course this 
Minute, 20th was not to be to the exclusion of other useful knowledge, the improvement of the 
May 1835 — country in science and civilization being not less an object with the framers of the 
contd. act t j lan ^ xev i va i 0 f ifcg literature, accordingly words follow those above cited 

which declare the funds assigned to be also applicable to " the introduction and 
promotion of a knowledge of the sciences/' But the whole scope and tenor as well 
as the literal meaning of the provision shows that the two objects were intended 
to be combined and prosecuted in concert. They have been so hitherto and the 
funds have accordingly assumed a distribution providing for all that is thus indi- 
cated- The revival of literature has been promoted by the assistance given to 
seminaries of education previously existing, and by the establishment of fresh, 
and likewise through the printing and publishing of classical works hitherto only 
to be procured in manuscript. To these objects a certain proportion of the funds 
assigned has been made applicable. The encouragement of learned men, the next 
thing indicated, has been effected as well through the support afforded them in 
institutions of education and in the superintendence and preparation of works for 
publication as by other advantages incident to the system pursued, amongst which 
not the least effectual is the provision for securing prolonged study by stipends 
to promising students. All this has been done for the natives and their literature, 
while the establishment of English classes in all existing seminaries and of fresh 
seminaries specifically for the teaching of English and English science and the 
attempts made by translation to make that science accessible to those ignorant of 
English have all had for their object the fulfilment of the other purposes indicated 
in the Act of 53rd Geo. Ill, viz. " the introduction and promotion of a knowledge 
of the sciences/' assuming this to mean the sciences of Europe. Thus, while through 
the old established seminaries and by their reform upon principles approved by the 
influential classes connected with them, and through the printing and publishing 
of their classics the first purpose indicated in the words of the Act has been sought 
to be accomplished, there has yet remained applicable to the cultivation of European 
science and English literature by far the larger proportion of the new fund set apart 
in 1813 by the legislature. If a comparison were to be made of the sums spent in 
printing native works and in providing new machinery for teaching the languages 
of the east or new stipends for successful scholars of its liteiaturc with the amounts 
lavished on English masters and on teachers of the rudiments of European science 
and on professors of law and metaphysics and natural plrilosophy, etc., etc., it will 
be found that the former bear but a small proportion to the aggregate of the latter 
thus showing that in the appropriation of the lakh of rupees even on the principles 
of the Orientalists, the desire to teach our own language and literature and science 
has always prevailed over the revival of the old literature and that we have given 
to what is last stated in the enactment as a purpose of assignment, perhaps even 



-r 



Minulc by 11. T. P> 'inse]) 137 

tin undue preference, It has always, however, been a matter of discussion and //< T. Pn'nscp's 
difference amongst the members of the Committee where the line ought to be Minute , 20th 
drawn — ^ome desiring to give more to mvj brunch, some to the other, but never yet ^ a U — 
has there been any one member of the Committee who lias gone the length of the con 'd. 
Government resolution and expressed the opinion that nil the funds set apart by 
the Act nf Parliament for the different objects therein declared ought to be 
vmpfoycl on EnjUth ednwthn alone, to the exclusion of even the vern acular 
dialects of the country* 

* ***** * * 

The fourth member of the Legislative Council of India had then recently been 
appointed President of the Committee of Public Instruction but in this reference 
and the discussion of which it was the is^uc he had taken no part. After the two 
letters of the Committee submitting the reference had been sent in, Mr. Macaulay 
laid before the Governor-* I cnrral the minute of his views on the subject which \h 
recorded in the proceeding* of the Executive Council and is the basis of the resolu- 
tion of the 7th March. 

******* 

This minute was evidently a partisan paper advocating in a controversial and 
not very moderate tone the cau^e of one section of the Committee. It proceeded 
further than the warmest advocates of that side had yet ventured. Its abortions 
and arguments therefore demanded some investigation before they should be adopted 
as th^ basis of any grave proceedings of the Government, Without instituting, 
however, any Mich enquiry and, as far as is known to me without consulting any 
on** of lho-e in whom he was in the habit of placing confidence* the late Govcrnor- 
fren'Tal immediately upon the perusal of the minute in question, before any of the 
papers had ben laid before the Council or discussed, added to it the declaration 
of his entire concurrence and ho forwarded it to the Secretary of the Department 
for circulation. I circulated it and in a few days the box was returned to me with a 
brief minute by Mr. Hos*, .stating hi,s own opinion to be opposed to the grant of 
scholarships and his winh that all nhould be left free to follow the course of instruc- 
tion fh'*y preferred but without notice of the htatemcnts of doubtful accuracy con- 
tained in the minute of Mr. Macaulay, I was not then aware of Colonel Morrison'*; 
intention to record hw opinion on the hubjeel. J lis minute reached me some days 
afterwards. In the interval, however, of the circulation of Mr, Maeaulay's minute 
it got wind T know not from what quarter that it wa;s the intention of Government 
to abolish the MudrtiMt and Sanscrit colleges* I wan waited upon twice by tho head 
preceptor of the former and nilerly denied that there was any such intention. But 
the report wa<i too widely circulated, and too well vouched to be ho chcelccd and 
the whole town of Calcutta was Boon in a ferment* In the course of two days a 



138 



Selections from Educational Records 



R. T. Prinsep's 
Minute, 20lh 
May 1835— 
contcL 



petition respectful in language but strong in the points to which it adverted wag 
signed by upwards of eight thousand educated Mohommedans, and a similar petition 
in behalf of the Sanscrit College was under preparation by the Hindoos. Seeing 
this ferment and sensible of the mischief that must follow the adoption to the 
full of the recommendations contained in the minute of Mr. Macaulay which seemed 
to me to be assented to by the Governor-General, I took upon myself, in my capacity 
of Secretary, to submit to the Head of the Government a note explaining many 
of the circumstances on which Mr. Macaula) r had, in my* opinion, built erroneous 
conclusions or had written from imperfect information. I forwarded my note to 
the Governor-General and was at first asked through Mr. Pakenham, the Private 
Secretary, to withdraw it under a verbal assurance that the minute of Mr. Macaulay 
would be sent down to the Committee of Education of which he was President, and 
myself a member, in order that the matter might there be fully argued and dis- 
cussed. I was of course satisfied that the mischief should be so stopped and cir- 
culated the note no further. In the meantime Colonel Morrison also appeared 
alive to the importance of the question and recorded his minute in behalf of native 
literature in which he deprecated any hasty innovations hostile to it and concluded 
with recommending a reference of the question to England. The matter was 
brought forward at- the very next meeting of Council when this recommendation 
as well as the promise held out to me, were both disregarded and the resolution of 
the 7th March was passed, stopping short indeed of the threatened abolition of the 
Sanscrit and Axabic colleges but directed towards the insidiously undermining of 
both, and for the first time avowing the principle that oriental literatute and in- 
struction were thenceforward to receive no further aid from Government, not being 
considered objects deserving of its encouragement. The resolution is evidently 
founded on the minute of Mr. Macaulay above adverted to, and not upon the refer- 
ences from the Committee at large to the points submitted in which it nowhere 
adverts. It is thus based upon a minute advocating with all the warmth of contro- 
versy one particular side of a debated question without the opportunity having been 
given to those opposed to this view to offer any explanations or reply. Nay the 
late Governor-General would not allow the answer prepared to it to appear on 
record, for upon finding that Mr. Macaulay *s paper was not to be referred to the 
Committee of Public Instruction for further discussion, as I have been led to expect 
would be done, I submitted to His-Lordship whether my note also should not be 
recorded for the correction of some of the statements of the minute which were 
erroneous or founded on imperfect information. I was met by a rebuke for having 
taken upon myself so much, accompanied by the declaration that Secretaries are 
the organs and not advisers of the Government and that their submitting notes at 
all was under sufferance and an irregularity. 

* * 



Minnie hy IT. T. Prinscp 



139 



I think, therefore. T nm fully warranted by wlmt fell under my view in the //. T. Prinscp* s 

course of the whole transaction in cnllinc the resolution of the 7th March a rash Act. Minufc, 20th 

May .1835— 

****** *r concUL 

I have gone into great long! It in Mating the impressions left on my mind by the 
measure I have above discussed, and yet. T feel that there is an infinity more to say, 
1 have not thought it necessary to make on this occasion any detailed reply to the 
minute of Mr. Mneaulay in which the measure originated, because although my 
previous note diVusMng its propositions has not been recorded the substance of it 
is well known to the members of Government and it would be reviving a discussion 
already set to rest were I again to go over the same grounds. 

I fear I cannot expert that the question will now bo reopened. I record this 
minute, therefore, as a protect against tho continuance of measures founded on the 
principles of the resolution of the 7th March and as a declaration of the extremely 
mischievous and injurious tendency which I believe to be inherent in them, Tho 
true principle in my opinion U (hat of leaving the natives to choose their own courses 
of education and to encourage all equally on the part of Government making it our 
busine^ to give to them the direction to true science and good taste in literature 
which the superior lights of Europe ought to enable us to bestow. Any deviation 
from this principle of free choice and equal encouragement can only do mischief 
to the cause by exciting feelings of distrust and perhaps irritation. 

I need not add in conclusion that I am decidedly adverse to printing the 
resolution of the 7th March in order to give it further publicity as is proposed in the 
last letter on the subject received from the Committee. 



H. T. PRINSEP. 



20th May 1835. 



(36) letter No. 2174, dated the 20th April 1835, from the General Com- 
mittee of Public Instruction to the Government of India. 

Since my letter of tho 9th instant which acknowledged their receipt tho Gen oral Letter dated 

. 4 , 4t t . Committee of Public Instruction has moro fully 20th April 1S35 

bUtMncnt (A) Miotrinc tho * * * * ^ *• , ft ^ J t J ^ * 

------ considered the Instructions of tho Supreme Govern- from the General 

moni of tho 7th ultimo, and I am directed to submit Committee* 
for approval of tho Jlon'blc the Governor-General 
in Council the annexed eight propositions^ which 
have been adopted by the Committee with reference 



cfrtoflf of ari'ttta! ivorJci under 
irnprc**fon on account of the 
f'oinrnltUe, 

Statement (B) rhmv'mg hy 
i"*tmml<» tfi»* ttrmneinl condition 
of tho (Son^rai Fund. 



j Document No* 30, p. M2» 



9 



\ 



uo 



Selections from Educational Records 



Th<** Comt>ntt*rs 
proposals, 20lh 

April JSZ'J — 
contcl. 



to the orders quoted and to forward at the same time the statements mentioned 
in the margin with the following explanations.* 



A ret I i<* 



Sanilvit 



* * 4 



Salt *lrit 



* The rtntrnient* are bero given in brie! (Ed.). 

Statement A* 



Boots u infer impression, etc. 

Trht^hUon from the Greek of Geometry and Tritronomclrv* 
Translation of HuUon*B Mathematics, % 
Futtwa Alatngiri. 

Translations of (1) Crocker's Land .Surveying, (2) Hooper's 

Vatic Meettm, (3) Bridge's Algebra, 
Khazanatul Ilm« 
Malm Bharat. 
Sn$tara. 

Kniidtt&a'fi Nnirfiadhn. 
Raj Tnnmgim* 

Translation of Hooper « Vmlt Ntcum* 

fiord x fuhsrribetl for. 

Riga Gunita, 
Vivfld.i ChinLimttm. 
Translation of Hut ton** Geometry. 



Total exjvnditnre incurred 
liabilities for printing -\ 
Liabilities for m\ script Jons 



R*<. 

hup 



Total 



-10,367 



TAT EM EST B. 
}*innrcinl ftirnnlt Jot ]&3fi. 



AtithopV*) Charge in Charge in 

Appropriation. January. \%Xu comfng jean 



In^itutien*, etc. . 

3?j;J t\p\ Vn *r;d juirlv* rf I«r<>) * * 

7 \rr J e 



Us, 




i 










irrj*« 


]4,r/o 






* « * 




IK41-2 




* ■ * 




I. wo 






t *T7, t 



J**" 



The Committee's proposals 141 

2. Statement A shews i)io oriental works under impression and their state olThe Committee's 
progress under th o orders of Government. The Committee proposes (with reserve proposals. 20th 
Won which will be mentioned) to suspend the further progress of the^o works and ^tpn! 7535— 
recommends that it be authorised to make over the unfinished copies to any societies con ^* 

or persons willing and competent to finish thorn. 

3. From this recommendation is excluded the Fatwa Alamgiri. Of this^volu- 
minouF and popular work of Law only about one-sixth remains to be finished. The 
Committee, therefore, 1ms authorised its completion under my control in the expec- 
tation that by iU sale some return of the expenditure incurred may bo obtained. 
The Inayah and the Arabic version of Bridge's Algebra mentioned in the statement, 
as will be observed, are differently circumstanced. The Committee will probably 
have occasion to address Government separately as to these works, 

4. As a measure of useful economy the Committee recommends the abolition 
of the Book Depository the necessity of which is superseded by the proposition to 
FUh'p^nd the progress of the oriental works under impression, and the decision to 
abstain from printing other*. The Committee will hereafter submit the plan which 
it proposes as to the di^po^al of the books in store. 

* 

5. The General Committee in of opinion that a considerable saving may bo 
effected by providing for the performance of the duties executed by the late Sccre* 
tnrios to the Benares and Calcutta Sanskrit Colleges on a more moderate scale and 
pugee^ts, therefore, that no appointment for those vacant offices "be at present 
turtle. 

0. It is in communication with the Managing Committees on tho subject and 
will hereafter submit the arrangement winch may bo deemed most expedient. 

7, The Government will observe that tho General Committee proposes under 
its late onions to the extent of its moantf, to institute fchoota for teaching English 
literature and science in the principal cities and towns. Enclosure B is an estimate 
(in part conjectural) of tho means which tho measures recommended will probably 
place at ita disposal, 

8. It is intended to commence with the populous cities of Patna and Dacca 
and I have opened a correspondence on the subject with the principal civil func- 
tionaries. The Committee hopes that a fund may be raised by tho voluntary sub- 
scriptions of the wealthy inhabitants sufficient to erect or buy Hchool houses and 
contemplates the appropriation of about (5,000 rupees per annum from tho General 
fund to each of these schools. 

* 

0. Tho General Committee is of opinion that tho publication of tho resolutions 
of the Government above quoted would huyo a beneficial effect in exciting in tho 

v 



V 



J 42 



Selections from Educational Records 



The Committee's minds of the influential classes of the community an interest in its proceedings and 

proposals, 20th begs permission to publish those resolutions for general information. 
April 1835— 

(Sd.) J. C. d SUTHERLAND, 

Secretary, G. 0. P. L 

Fort William : 
The 20th April, 1835. 



concld. 



Committee's 
propositi one. 



(36) Propositions adopted by the General Committee of Public Instruction 

on the 11th April 1835. 

_ * 

1. That the Government be requested to permit to publish the orders lately 
received. 

2. That the Government be requested to permit the Committee to complete 
the printing of the Fatawa Alamgiri. 

3. That the Government be requested to permit the Committee to make over 
the other unfinished works which are in hand to any society or person who may 
be willing and competent to complete them. 

4. That* the Government be requested to postpone the appointment of Secre- 
taries to the Sanskrit College of Calcutta and Benares till the Committee shall be 
able to ascertain whether the services of such officers be indispensably necessary 
or whether they may not be procured at a small expense* ^ 

5. That measures be immediately taken for breaking up the depository. 

6. TJhat the Secretary be instructed to prepare an estimate of the funds whfch 
will immediately be at our disposal for the purposes of English education. 

7. That schools for the teaching of English literature and science through 
the medium of the English language be established in the principal towns under 
^bhe Presidencies of Fort William and Agra as funds for that purpose become avail- 
able and as school masters can be procured. 

8. That Sir Edward Ryan, Mr. Trevelyan, Captain Birch and Mr. Grant be 
appointed a Sub-Committee for the purpose of ascertaining and reporting what 
persons duly qualified are willing to be employed as teachers of English and on what 
terms,* 

(Sd.) T. B. MACAULAY. 
(True copy.) 

(Sd.) J. C. a- SUTHERLAND, Secretary. 

March 25, 1835. 

* On the 3rd June 1834 Government approved of propositions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7 ; and pointed 
out that propositions G and 8 related to matters \rith which tho Committee itself was competent to 
deal. [Ed.] * 



CHAPTER VllL 

LOKD AUCKLAKD'S MlNUTE. " * 

Tlius a compromise appeared to have been reached. But the 
matter was not to rest here. There was no doubt a great body of feeling 
against the new learning and fears were expressed regarding failure to 
maintain the old. As to the English language, the necessity of insisting 
upon it as a qualification for service had not been officially recognised. 
The committee on examinations which met in Calcutta in 1820 to give 
effect to the proposal of Government that literary attainments should 
be made " the condition of appointment to the law stations in the courts 
and of permission to practice as law officers in those courts/' had pre- 
scribed, both, in the law and in the language in which it is written, 
u Sanskrit or Arabic, as the case may be." In 182S Sir .John Malcolm 
Governor of Bombay, recorded an interesting minute, in which he de- 
clared against the teaching of English as an unnecessary burden, though 
translations of English works were requisite. An extract is reprinted 
as document No. 37. 

Lord Auckland succeeded Lord Bcntinck as Governor-General. 
Petitions were received from students of the Sanskrit College and the 
Madrassa, complaining that they were deprived of their stipends. One 
of these and Lord Auckland's reply are printed as documents Nos. 38 
and 39. 

In a comprehensive minute, dated the 24th November 1839, Lord 
Auckland reviewed the situation, guaranteed the maintenance of the 
oriental institutions, declared for English instruction in zilla schools 
and the foundation of central colleges and advocated translations into 
the vernaculars for vernacular classes in the zilla schools. In the 
same minute he supported Adam's proposals for the extension of mass 
education, but submitted his larger projects to the Court of Directors 
and desired to learn the experience of Bombay. This minute and Mr. 

( H3 ) 

u2 



Selections from Educational Records 



Colvin's note thereon (documents 40 and 41), form a fitting close to this 
volume. They gather up the threads of the past years and conclude 
the early history of education in British India. 



(37) Extract from Minute of 1828 by Sir J. Malcolm* Governor of 

Bombay.* , 

# * # # # # * 



Minute by Sir J. I have on political grounds a consolation, derived from my conviction of tta 
Malcolm. impossibility of our ever disseminating that half-knowledge of our language, which 

is all any considerable number of the natives could attain. It would decrease that 
positive necessity which now exists for the servants of GoVernment making them- 
selves masters of the languages of the countries in which they are employed, and 
without which they never can become in any respect competent to their public 
duties. 

One of the chief objects I expect from diffusing education among the natives 
of India, is our increased power of associating them in every part of our adminis- 
tration. This I deem essential on grounds of economy, of improvement, and of 
security. I cannot look for reduction of exjiense in the different branches of our 
Government from any diminution of the salaries now enjoyed by European public 
servants, but I do lo6k to it from many of the duties they now have to perform 
being executed by natives on diminished salaries. I further look to the employ- 
ment of the latter in such duties of trust and responsibility, as the only mode in 
which we can promote their improvement ; and I must deem the instruction we 
are giving them dangerous, instead of useful, unless the road is opened wide on 
those who receive it, to every prospect of honest ambition and honourable 
distinction. 

To render men who are employed beyond the immediate limits of the Presi- 
dency fit for such duties as I contemplate, no knowledge of the English language is 
necessary. The acquisition of that would occupy a period required for other studies, 
and pursuits, but it is quite essential to aspiring natives that they should have the 
advantage of translation from our language of the works which are best calculated 
to improve their minds, and increase their knowledge not only of general science, 
but to enable them to understand the grounds which led us to introduce into the 
system of the administration we have adopted for India the more liberal views 



* Evidence of 1832, App. I, Ko, 26 [3S5/525]. 



Miiwic 6y Sir «/♦ Makohn 



H5 



nnd t*»\tn<!i>i umim** of our j^ilirv nnd le^Ution in England. It h to tho labours Minut? tyf $ ir *^ 

of th** Elphin^on* profevvir* that we mint look for tlut instruction whirli h Malcatm 

to form the inliw instrument* that mu*t btKvuno the milium of diffusing such — concjd. 

bn«%h«dt;e ; ixtvl m no duty t\m I*** mom important than that of men who are place I 

id thr wry brad of this cour^ of instruction, and a* the j>o\vor of selecting tho«c 

«ju:dif:*d for tin* important tn*k u ill much dejH\>td upon the liberality of the jvtlarie^ 

f^fcuM them, I tnM with Mr. Warden, thnt the Hon'bl** Court will nnko n 

pnmt, to promote thi* institution, of a Mini nt bust c<pml to that Mdwribed by the 

iiaiiv* * of t hi ^ presidency. 

******* 

JOHN* MALCOLM. 

{*>V) 77,'* hnmhU yiiivm of f/*e SUulml* of (hv\ronwot Sanskrit Collajc 
of t'*':lc*itta f to fh* Itujh! HoolJr fs,rd Ga,r<jc Auckland, Governor- 
(tnutiil, d'lfni Oth Awjuzt 

That impr^ *-d v.jth t).** im|>or!.wie#* of cultivating th** &m*eril lanjjuctgt* Petition /<> //>rtf 
ox^uu* {o St- taint! n \rhteta to th<* ^urM writing-* of the Ilmdmn and containing Aurkhmtt, Oth 
v.orln vAiub t*'p:» "til tl^ir mnnner^ and ru>tom\ the ancient kirn** of Hindoo- August ISoO, 
tL*n ru<brA<A j?Mfit* of bmh to tho*** Hrahmiu* mid Pundit* who ctavoted them- 
**dvc* to it- ftrvjutMtiosi* in order that th«*y may cultivate it without interruption, 
and import it to t\j* children of other Hfahtnin* and Pundit** f who came to them for 
ift>tnKtio*» lt*w *Y\fi**t*+ux pirt* of tlm country. Student* when found competent 
ns.d dc^r\im\ t'cnvM j;ranH of land* tewank of lhoir merit. Sine*' the ncce*- 
n<m <d Mohnm^bm j^iwn, thouph tin* pr*>jrrv*i of Samcrit httipui^o wa^ n little 
retard**! ; y*t th* w Mohamednn kmp notuithMawlin^ their tyrannical measures 
f r.fMJtttpd it* + mltivatiou not only by allowing t!»e nndi^turbM \mv -e .-ion of the 
former pant* <A th** IHmlw*; but nbo pre^entin^ nrw ones to thoM* who mo*t 
d^^n^^l th r m. 

AUo;'rib»n tb^ Miudi'b, bnving j'ot pn*'e«-Mon of thi^ conntry, nnglected forn 
lonp tuti** the cultivation of th" (>ri^ntnl lutjgnuf^i and particularly tho Sanscrit. 
(iri<\T*\ nt thn vuh(lnnui\ tunny Mnulveeut^i^t^! by tho>e !inf*li^hmeu who 
nppr^int^l th* + valiio ol San'**rit |uir^rnt^l a petition to tba C^mrt of Dir^ctow 
jti7>yin^ for tlie i- tabh>hm«nt of an institution Un t!»e putpom of prtv«rviiij» nt\d 
propafatitif; tbi\ H.m^rit hugttapn of tlie ]Iindooi. 

J/>rd Amb^rrt, v»ho v»a** then (tovrtnordSpnend eMnbli^unl tlu i present college 
in obfdirncc to (he order* of ih*\ Court of Ditrctori, and gtoatly bonefiteii tho 



146 Selections from Educational Records 

Petition, 9-8- natives of this country by employing good and able Pundits, and allowing small 
1836— contd. stipends to the students who resorted to it, from the different parts of the country, 

and prosecuted their studies with industry and success. 

But to your petitioners' great misfortune and mortification, Lord William 
Bentinck in 1835 passed an order depriving the newly admitted students of the 
Sanscrit College of thoir stipends. This measure your petitioners feel to be a great 
detriment to the progress and interest of the Sanscrit College, — it is in fact indirectly 
abolishing the said institution and eradicating that sacred language from the East ; 
for your petitioners, having none to support them in the city, cannot attend it nor 
acquire that proficiency which can reform their manners and customs. They 
therefore, pray that your Lordship will graciously enquire of men, who have studied,- 
the Sanscrit language, ita value and importance. 

Your petitioners believing your Lordship to be a great patron to the civiliza- 
tion and reformation of the Hindoos, pray that your Excellency will mercifully 
confer on the m the little allowance they enjoyed, for that will enable them to pro- 
secute their studies without any inconvenience and preserve the Hindoo shastras 
from sinking into oblivion. The expense the Government will incur for this pur- 
pose is at the utmost 600 rupees a month, a sum quite insufficient and trifling for the 
object for which it is to be defrayed. Further your petitioners believing that your 
Lordship will not forget the duties of a ruler who is the protector not only of persons 
and property, but also a promoter of a knowledge and reformation, Your Lordship 
conferring this boon on Your Lordship's petitioners does not make only them happy 
but the Hindoo community in general, for the preservation of the sacred language. 

If your Lordship be of opinion that the Government should not impart know- 
ledge by means of allowing stipends to the students, your Lordship's petitioners 
beg to remind your Excellency that in such a cause, the Government would bo 
guilty of partiality for allowing the students of the medical college that stipend, 
upon which all your petitioners' hopes of improvement depended. However, your 
petitioners, now thrown into greatest despair, pray that Your Excellency as a patron 
of learning, and protector of the helpless will adopt such means as would enable 
your petitioners to acquire that proficiency in the Sanscrit language which will not 
only enlighten them, but reform their degenerated manners and customs. 

And your petitioners as in duty bound 
shall over pray* 

Signed by 70 Students. 

Government Sanskrit College, 

Calcutta : 
27ie 9tJi August, 1836. 



Minute by Lord Auckland 



147 



(3S) Minute, dated 24th August 4S36 f by Lord Auckland, on the petitions 
for the restoiation of stipends to the Mithammadan and Sanskrit 
Colleges. 

In declaring that I cheerfully acquiesce in the suggestion of two of the Mombors Minute by Lord 
of Council that the reconsideration of the objects of these petitions should be do- Auckland, Aug. 
ferred until the expected instruction* shall be received from the Court of Directory 24th 
I would write, to save myself from* misapprehension, to state that in my opinion a 
very wide distinction is to be drawn between n system of stipends and of scholar- 
ships. By the stipendary system I understand an undiscrimmating payment of 
allowances to students to induce them to attend a place of instruction, and I think 
that it will bo found to have been generally unsuccessful in all countries. On tho 
other hand I hope that scholarships, limited in number, given for a limited time, to 
the best students, upon fair and s evere competition, may be considered as amongst 
the best stimulants to emulation and learning ; and though it may fairly be doubted 
whether for the purposes of general education, the funds at the disposal of tho 
Committee of Public Instruction may at present be most advantageously applied 
to their establishment yet to satisfy, as far as reasonably we may, the minds of 
numerous and respectable classes of the Community, I should not bo sorry to see 
cither function on institutions to this effect conveyed to us from tho Court of 
Directors, and in saying thus much, I am willing to hope that in this as in many 
other cn^cs opinions apparently opposed to each other havo in truth but little of 
c«cnlial difference. 

(Sd.) AUCKLAND, 

AuQmt 21, 1S3G. 

(40) Minnie by the Bight Uon'ble Lord Auckland, the Governor-General, 

dated 24th November 1S39S 

Native Education. 

I have not hitherto, since I assumed charge of the Government, recorded my Minute by Lord 
sentiments at any length on the important questions which regard the best means Auckland t 24th 
of promoting education amongst the natives of India. The subject is one of tho^ T<w * 4839. 
highest interest, and especially calls for calm consideration and for combined effort. 
Rut unhappily I have found violent differences existing upon it, and it was for a 
time (now I trust past, or fast passing away) a watchward for violent dissension 



♦ Trinl^! in Tan Itrvo. Dfr. Pcnr 1 * LtUm atMetntrl in Lard AucUnmt an thr *h///Vt/ of NtiU\t 



148 



Selections from Educational Records 



Minute by Lord 
Auckland, 1839 
— contd. 



and in some measure of personal feelings, I judged it best, under these circum- 
stances, to abstain from what might have led me into unprofitable controversy, 
and to allow time and experience to act, with their usual healing and enlightening 
influence, upon general opinion. I may earnestly hope that we are now not .very 
far remote from arriving at some satisfactory result in respect to our educational 
controversies, and I will approach the topic, with the hope of contributing in some 
degree to this end, 

% Annexed to this paper will be found a note* compiled by Mr. Colvin, con* 
taining a condensed view of the principal facts, and of occasional notices of some 
considerations suggested by them, which relate to the general progress and present 
condition of the plans of native instruction as pursued in different parts of India, 
and of the tenor of the most important directions on the subject of public instruction 
which have been received from the Hon'ble the Court of Directors, and with 
reference to those facts, as they apply particularly to the progress effected in the 
different Presidencies, and to the circumstances which have come under my obser- 
vation, when at the seat of several of our institutions in Bengal, I will endeavour to 
state with all fairness the conclusions to which I 'have brought my mind on this 
subject. 

3. I have first however to state my opinions on two specific references con- 
nected with the questions which are before me from the President in Council — „ 
the one relating to the appropriation of Funds ^heretofore assigned to particular 
Institutions, and the other to Mr, Adam's scheme for the improvement of the 
Indigenous Schools in the Bengal and Behar districts. 

L Before entering on the details of the first of these subjects, I may observe 

that it may in my opinion be clearly admitted, 
and I am glad from the papers before me to see 
that this opinion is supported by the authority of 
Mr. Prinsep, that the insufficiency of ihe funds 
assigned by the state for the purposes of public 
instruction has been amongst the main causes of 
the violent disputes which have taken place upon 
the education question, and that if the funds pre- 
viously appropriated to the cultivation of oriental 
literature had been spared, and other means placed 
4t the disposal of the promoters of English Educa-„ 
tion, they might have pursued their object aided by 
the good wishes of all. In the Bengal Presidency, 
with its immense territory and a revenue of above 13 millions, the yearly expendi- 



Parliamtfntary grant 
Interest on Govern- 
ment notes 
Madrissa 
Sanscrit College 
Delhi-Escheat IHind 
Benares College * 
Agra College- 
Endowment of 

villages . 
Interest of 
Government 
notes 



Us. 
8,888 

3,030 
2.6GG 
2,055 
250 
1,701 



Ks. 
1,175 



622 



Per mensem 



1,797 
20,387 



* Document No. 41. Pago 170 1 



Minute In/ Lord Auckland lib 

lure of the Ciovernment on this account is little in excess of £21,000 or 2,40,000 Minute bij Lord 
rupees* mid 1 need not say how in a country like India, it is to the Government that Attclrfand, 1S39 
the population must mainly W!c for facilities in the acquisition of improved learn- — contd. 
ing. There is* I well know, the strongest deMre on the part of the authorities both 
in England and India to support every well- arranged plan for the extension of edu- 
cation, and the despatches of the lion hie Court are full of the evidence of their 
anxiety on the subject. I may cite in particular the declaration of a despatch of 
the 18th February If>2 1.* *' In the meantime we wish you to be fully apprized 
of our zeal for the progress and improvement of education among the natives of 
India and of our wiHingie'M to make considerable sacrifices to that important 1 
end, if proper moans for the attainment of it could be pointed out. to us. M Such 
we may be assured is f he feeling by which the Court is up to tin's time guided, and 
the difficulty has been not in any unwillingness to grant the money necessary to 
give effect to good plans, but in framing such plans, on principles admitted to be 
satisfactory, and in finding fi( agcut.s for the execution of them, I have alluded 
to the limited amount and to the existing appropriation of our present funds, not 
certainly with the lightest idea of n sting reproach upon the previous course of 
administration, but merely as a fact winch is of impoitancc in its bearing upon 
former discussions. The .sum immediatelv at command was limited. Parlies 
wishing to promote tin* diffusion of knowledge in diffcicnt forms contended eagerly, 
the one to retain, the other to gain, that sum for the .schemes to which they were 
respectively favourable, and bad fresh Minis been at oner procurable, no one might 
have objected to their employment for u full and fair experiment on the new ideas 
whirh began to prevail. The inference to which I would point from these facts 
and observation* is that a principle of wise liberality, not stinting any object which 
can reasonably be recommended, but granting a measured and discriminating 
encouragement to all, is likely to command genera! acquiescence, and to obliterate, 
it may be hoped, the recollection of the nciimony which has been so prejudicial 
to the public weal in the cout>e of past proceedings* The Hon'hlc Court have 
already, as was to be expected, acted on this principle. They have made a separate 
grant for the publication of works of interest in the ancient literature of the country 
to be disbursed through t fie appropriate channel of the Asiatic Society, and this 
measure is one which has been hailed with universal satisfaction. 

5* On the merits of the finst or the two questions immediately referred to me, 
which I would consider in the spirit which 1 have here commended, 1 would at- once 
say, on the podtiou that the (iovcrumcut lias given a pledge that the funds hereto- 
fore assigned to particular Institutions .shall continue to be so for ever appropriated, 

* Document No, 21, $. ML Vt^oUS, 

X 



150 Selections from Educational Records^ 

ftlinutc by Lord that I cannot hesitate to express my conviction that the acts or intentions of the 
Auckland, 1S39 Government wil' not justly bear this very exclusive and restrictive construction, 
cojitd. I remember the discussion of April 183G and certainly 1 did not understand that 

the Resolution to which the Government then came was intended to have the force 
of a particular guarantee of the expenditure, wholly within each institution (what- 
ever might be the nature of the instruction to which they might be devofcfcd), of the 
funds which might have been assigned to it. The plain meaning of the proceed- 
ings and the professions of the Government seems to me to have been that, stipends 
having been everywhere discontinued, it would do nothing towards the abolition 
of the ancient seminaries of Oriental learning, so long as the community might desire 
to take advantage of them, their preservation as Oriental senuiiaries being alone 
at that time within the contemplation of cither party* Had it been intended to 
promise that, whether Arabic, "Sanscrit, or English were taught, the particular 
Institutions should at all events be retained, the meaning would surely have been 
expressed in much more distinct terms. My impression of the state of the case is 
briefly this — that the General Committee viewing the maintenance of the Oriental 
Colleges, on the footing to which I have referred, as prescribed and secured, 
proposed to consolidate all separate grants into one general fund, the savings of 
which, after the Oriental Colleges should have been thus provided for, should be held 
by them to be clearly applicable to their general purposes. The answer of the 
Government on 13th April 1830, after a-discussion in which I in the first instance 
expressed a willingness to assent to the propositions of the Committee, was in these 
guarded terms — " U?uler existing circumstances, the Government in India thinks 
it will not be advisable to make the consolidation into one fund of all grants, made 
heretofore by Government, for purposes of education, as suggested by the Sub- 
committee of Finance, nor does his Lordship in Council imagine that the Committee 
will be put to much inconvenience by chawing its funds separately as heretofore and 
crediting them whether derived from a Government monthly grant or from the 
interest of stock previously accumulated, to the particular seminaries to which they 
have been assigned* leaving any excess available in any institution to be appro- 
priated as may appear most equitable with reference to the orders of Government, 
7th March 1835,f and the pledges and assurances that may have been given to 
particular institutions/' The alteration of the word " belong " to " have been 
assigned M as marked above, will shew the spirit of compromise amongst varying 
opinions in which the draft was agreed to. There was here 310 statement that the 
consolidation was a thing wholly out of the question- The diversion of funds 
from particular Institutions was admitted as a measure which might or might not 



* Hrst ' belong ' was written, nmt afterwards this was changed to Miavo been assigned.* 
| Document Xo. Page 1IS0. 



Minute hy~ Lord Auckland 



151 



be proper, and (the circumstances of all institutions not being before the Govern- Minute by Lord 
meut) there is a reservation for the pledges and assurances " iJtat may have been Auckland, 1839 
given " to some of them. Under such a reservation, if a specific' promise in — confcd. 
perpetuity of a particular sum to a particular institution could be shewn, such a 
promise would have of course to be respected, but otherwise by these orders of 
April 1S3G, things were left exactly as they stood before. Whilst, however, I am 
bound to declare that such is my distinct impression on the subject, and whilst * 
for one I would reject the strict principle of absolute and irreclaimable appropria- 
tion, I~am yet strongly of opinion that it will be best on every account to dispose 
of the question on the principle of a liberal consideration to all wants and claims. 
I see no advantage to be gained in this case by a close contest for strict constructions, 
and having taken a review of money estimates and of local wants, I am satisfied 
that it will be best to abstract nothing from other useful objects, while I see at the 
same time nothing but good to be derived from the employment of the funds which 
have been assigned to each Oriental Seminary, exclusively on instruction in, or in 
connexion with, that seminary. I would- also give a decided preference, within 
these institutions, to the promotion in the first instance of perfect efficiency in 
Oriental instruction, and only after that object shall have been properly secured 
in proportion to the demand for it, would I assign the funds to the creation or sup- 
port of English classes* At the same time, I would supply to the General Committee 
of Public Instruction from the revenues of the State any deficiency that this Reso- 
lution might cause in the general income at their disposal — and if they should 
already have partially used for other objects, the savings arising from the semi- 
naries supported by special funds, I would, in recalling such savings, protect the 
general committee from loss on that account. The statement in the margin will 

shew the contribution from the Revenue which this 
final settlement of the subject will occasion* It 
will be perceived that, calculating from the amount 
of stipends as they existed untouched in the end 
of 183d, and deducting one-fourth as required at all 
events for the Oriental colleges under a scheme of 
scholarships such as I shall hereafter state that I 
would approve, the additional annual disbursement 
from the Treasury will be about 25,000 rupees and 
perhaps there may be G,000 rupees more per annum, 
on account of the office, which has been abolished, 

of Secretary to the Sanscrit college at Benares. I 

25,170 am well persuaded that the Ilon'ble Court will ap- 
prove of our having closed these controversies at this 
limited amount of increased expense, I would, upon this understanding, willingly 

x 2 



Calcutta Sans- 
crit College 

Madrissa 

Benares Collogo * 

Agra College 

Delhi Collogo 



— ' CO 
■*± ~ CO 

^3 • 

~ v. - 



cm 

054 
318 
480 
027 



Totak 
Deduct one-fourth 

Total 



7,8iS 
4,170 

G.GG0 
7,G24 

33,500 
. 8,300 



Selections from Educational Records 



Minute by Lord join in the direction sent to the general committee in the letter of Mr/Prinsep 
Auckland, 1839 on the 31st of July last, " to avoid making any alienation v (from the assigned 
— coutd. funds of the Oriental Institutions) " without previously soliciting the sanction of 

Government." They should, as I have said, he desired to appropriate the funds 
within the Oriental Colleges, first to Oriental and then to English instruction. I 
-would not, on any account, admit the extension of the system of scholarships within 
these colleges beyond the general proportion (which should he on a liberal scale) 
allowed elsewhere, for this would be an excessive and artificial encouragement 
which might be justly objected to. But I would secure the most eminent Pro- 
fessors for the Colleges. I would encourage the preparation, within the limits of 
the funds, of the most useful boohs of instruction, such as of the Siddhants and 
Sanscrit version of Euclid which Mr. Wilkinson lias urged upon us, and I would 
provide, in some form, which the general committee should be required to take 
into early consideration, for an improved and effect ivc superintendence of the 
Oriental colleges of the North- Western Provinces, where I know that such a super- 
vision is very obviously required. Funds that might still remain available could 
be doubtless to much advantage devoted to European instruction in union with 
those particular Institutions, and I should look with very warm interest to an 
efficient scheme for imparting English Education to Mahomedans at the Madrissa 
in Calcutta. 1 

G. The other reference made to me is with regard to Mr* Adam's plan for the 
improvement of indigenous Schools and Teachers. I would observe upon it that it 
is impossible to read his valuable and intelligent report, without being painfully 
impressed with the low state of instruction as it exists amongst the immense masses 
of the Indian population. Attempts to correct so lamentable an evil may well be 
eagerly embraced by benevolent minds. Yet I cannot but feel with the President 
in Council that the period has not yet arrived when the Government can join in 
these attempts with reasonable hope of practical good. When Mr. Adam enforces 
his views " for the instruction of the poor and ignorant, those who are too ignorant 
to understand the evils of ignorance and too poor, even if they did, to be able to 
remove them/' — the inference irresistibly presents itself that among these is not 
the field in which our efforts can at present be most successfully employed. The 
small stock of knowledge which can now be given in elementary schools will of itself 
do little for the advancement of a people. The first step must be to diffuse wider 
information and better sentiments amongst the upper and middle classes, for it 
seems, as may be gathered from the best authorities on the subject, that a scheme 
of general instruction can only be perfect, as it comprehends a regularly progressive 
provision lor higher tuition. In the European States where such systems have been 
- recently extensively matured, this principle, is, I believe, universally observed. 
There is a complete series of Universities in great Towns, of Academies m Provincial 



Minute by Lord Avoid and 153 

divisions and of small local Schools, all connected in a combined plan of instruction. Minute by Lord 
The extension of the plan to the Parish or Village School has been the last stage, Auckland, 1839 
as must naturally have been the case, in the national progress. Mr. Adam's plan^ con ^* 
contemplated such a rise of able pupils from the village to the zillah schools, but 
the suggestion could not immediately have effect. Here we are 3'et engaged on 
the formation and efficient direction of our upper institutions. When, indeed, the 
series of vernacular class of books for our single Zillah Schools, which is still a 
desideratum, and to which I shall subsequently refer, shall have been published, and 
their utility shall have been established by practice, Mr. Adam's recommendations 
may be taken up with some fairer prospect of advantage. For the present I would t 
' confine our measures in reference to his reports to injunctions on the General Com- 
mittee that they bear in mind his particular suggestions and objects in determining 
on the series of class books referred to. I would submit the plan to the Hon'ble 
Court for the expression of their sentiments and wishes, and in the collection of 
information for an eventual decision I would make use of the experience which the 
Bombay measures of village instruction, alluded to in the note annexed,* will have 
afforded. For this purpose I would communicate Mr. Adam's report to the Govern- 
ment of Bombay, and ask how far the scheme which he describes is in accordance 
with that which is pursued in the provinces of that presidenc5 r , and what opinion 
may be formed from the result already obtained by their village schools, of the pro- 
priety of carrying out Mr. Adam's plans in their important parts. The encourage- 
ment to existing school masters, which is the leading suggestion in Mr. Adam's plan, 
will probably have been largely tried at Bombay, and the extent to which those 
School Masters have reaped improvement under such encouragement will be a most 
interesting subject of enquiry* I learn also in the course of my enquiries regarding 
the previous progress of education in India, that a school society existed for some 
time in Calcutta, the operations of which were directed with partial success to the 
amendment of indigenous schools. Mr* Hare will probably be able to explain the 
history of this society, which drew a grant of 400 or 500 rupees a month from Govern- 
ment, and to give also the causes of its extinction. I would ask this gentleman to 
favour Government with a report regarding that society, — and I would conclude 
upon tliis subject by recording my opinion that when such a scheme as that proposed 
by Mr. Adam comes to be tried, the arrangements for introducing it should be on 
a liberal and effective scale, and that it ought not to be undertaken at all, until the 
Government is satisfied that it has at command a thoroughly zealous and qualified 
superintendence* 

7. Having said thus much in answer to the references made to me by the Presi- 
dent in Council, I would proceed to record my observations upon the topics which 



* See Document No. 41. P^ge 175. 



154 Selections from Educational Records 

Minute by Lord geem to me most important in Tegard to our plans of education — I strongly feel that, 
Auckland t JS39 i n a ]] that we can do, we must be prepared for much disappointment in our early 
— contd. efforts to satisfy the demands made upon us on this subject. By some it will be 

lamented that we do not at once perfect enlarged schemes for general education, 
by others it will be regretted that what we do for the best pupils of our few semi-, 
naries seems to produce so partial an effect. Eeelings of this nature will attend us 
in whatever attempts we may engage for the improvement of any branch of our 
Indian Government. Our governing and instructed class belongs to a highly civil- 
ized community. It is in active and increasing intercourse with the European 
world, where, in our advanced state of society, skill and enterprise are daily gaining 
new triumphs. It is naturally impatient for the introduction in India of every 
plan which has, though probably afler repeated trials and failures, been adopted 
with success in European countries — and the sjnrit of free discussion excites bene- 
volent minds to bring forward the most extensive projects. On the other hand, 
we are dealing with a poor people, to the vast majority of whom the means of liveli- 
hood is a much more pressing object than facilities for any better description or 
wider range of study. Our hold over this people is very imperfect, and our power 
of offering motives to stimulate their zeal is but of confined extent. The agency 
which we can employ for reform is extremely narrow and liable to constant derange- 
ment. Of those who are willing to devote their energies to the business of giving 
or superintending instruction, Oriental Scholars are apt to be unduly prepossessed 
in favour of acquirements obtained by much labour and to which they are indebted 
for reputation ; while mere European Scholars are liable to be ignorant of and 
neglect national feeling, are at all events incompetent to make a proper use of native 
means for the execution of their plans. Where even the mind of our able pupil 
has been very greatly informed and enlightened, the knowledge gained by him may 
seem to produce no adequately corresponding result in after life. The student may N 
stand alone in the family or society of whiqli he forms a part. These can very 
generally have few feelings in common with him, and he may be unhappy and 
discontented in his peculiar position, or heTmay yield to the influences by which he is 
surrounded and accommodate himself to the sentiments and practices which his 
reason has taught him to disapprove. Add to this, that if he finds that his 
knowledge opens to him the prospect of advancement, he will, under a restricted 
competition, be over-confident in his own powers and unreasonable in his 
expectations, while at the same time he will be tempted to relax in the exertions 
necessary to maintain, or carry forward, the standard of proficiency at which he 
had arrived. These are circumstances of the operation of which we must all I think 
in a greater or less degree have had practical experience. I can only say upon them 
* that we must neither entertain sanguine or premature hopes of general success, nor 
yet allow ourselves to be seriousty discouraged. We must bo content to lay even 



i56 Selections from Educational Records 

Minute by Lord good the promise of upholding, while the people lesort to them, our established 
Auckland, 1839 Institutions of Oriental learnings*. I would make those Institutions equal bharers 
^-contd. with others in any general advantages or encouragements which we arc satisfied 

ought to be affoidcd with a view to the promotion of due efficiency in study. I 
would, from the funds which have been before allowed to them, assist in them, 
as I have already said, any judicious plans for ameliorating the course of study, as 
by aiding the publication of works which may seem likely to be decidedly useful to 
the students. Nor am I at all disposed to undervalue the amount of sound educa- 
tion and morality which is to be acquired at these Seminaries even without calling 
in the resources of European Science and Literature. I as ill not profess deep resjiect 
for the mere laborious study of a difficult language, or of the refinements and subtle- 
ties of scholastic learning. But sensible, as assuredly I am, of the radical errors 
and deficiencies of the oriental system, I am yet aware that the ellect of all advanced 
education, and I will add especially of a Mahomedan education, is in cherishing 
habits of reflection, of diligence, and of honourable emulation, that it tends also to 
elevate the tone of moral character, though its practical effect i£> unfortunately too 
frequently marred by the domestic and social habits of Oriental life* Judging, 
however, from the common principles of human nature, and from such experience 
as is referred to* in the ca&e of Mr. Wilkinson of Bhopal, it is not to the students of 
our Oriental Colleges, trained, as it will be admitted that they are in a faulty sys- 
tem to which they are yet naturally and ardently attached, that I would loolc for 
my chief instruments in the propagation of a new knowledge and more enlarged 
ideas. It was not through the professors of our ancient schools, but by the efforts 
of original thought and independent, minds, that the course of pliilosophical and 
scientific investigation and of scholastic discipline was for the most part reformed 
in Europe. The process of translation, it is to be-added, into the learned languages 
must unavoidably be so slow that, on that account alone, the arguments in favour 
of a more direct method of proceeding appear to me conclusively convincing. 

11. Another class of recommendations is that all the leading facts and prin- 
ciples of our literature and science be transferred by translations into the vernacular 
tongues. Mr* Hodgson in his book on Education, says,f " As a practical measure 
for the immediate adoption of Government, I have no hesitation in saying that to 
found a college for the rearing of a competent body of translators and of school- 
masters — in other words, for the systematic supply of good vernacular books and 
good vernacular teachers (leaving the public to employ both, in case the Govern- 
ment fund be adequate to no more than the maintenance of such college) would be 



* See paras. 23 and 24 of Note [A.]. Pago 175. 

t Miscellaneous Essays relating io Indian subjects, London, 1SS0, Vol. jj, p. 314. (The essay 
quoted was written in 1S37.) 



Minute by Lord Auckland 157 

nn infinitely hotter disposal of the Parliamentary grant than the present applica- Minute btf Lord 
tion of il to the training of a promiscuous crowd of En«IHh mnatterens, whose Auckland, 1S39 
average period of schooling cannot, by ;?<m//y?7?7;/, fit them to he the regenerators — contd, 
of their count t y. yet for wluw further and efficient prosecution of studies so diffi- 
cult and so alien to ordinary UM»s t there is no provision nor inducement whatever/* 

12, But tho^o who Mipport thin course overlook in the first place the extreme 
practical difficulty of preparing any very extensive course of translated or adapted 
works* We are speaking now of the means of an advanced and thorough education, 
and not of a limited series of work 1 * for the purposes of common instruction, to the 
compilation of which, as 1 shall have immediate occasion to remark, I am entirely 
favourable. The difficulties of translation have been illustrated by our knowledge 
of what has been effected at Bombay, where the object lias been prosecuted with 
much real, and I have annexed to thi* minute, a li«t** of the works which have been 
prepared in Arabic by the European officer* attached to the service of the Pasha 
of Egypt, and it will be f-ccn how very confined the number is, excepting in works 
of Military, Medical, or other Science. The clear truth seems to be that works of 
fciencc may, at lca«?t to some considerable extent (their range being nccessaril} f 
contracted), be rendered into other Inmrunges within a comparatively moderate 
period, but the translation, within any time the extent of which wo could reasonably 
calculate* of anything like n sufficient hbinry of works of general literature, history 
and philosophy an impossible task, I have only, therefore, to conclude on this 
point by stating my entire concurrence in the opinion which has been quoted in the 
note from u'fle^mteh of the Ilwi'blo Court to the effect ** that the higher tone and 
bettor spitit of European Literature can produce their full effect only on thoso who 
become familiar with them in the original languages/* 

13. I would then make it my principal aim to communicate through the means 
of the English language, a complete education in European Literature, Philosophy 
and Science to the greatest number of students who ma)* bo found muly to accept 
it at our hands, and for who^c instructions our binds will admit of our providing. 
All our experience proves that, by such-a method, a real and powerful stimulus in 
given to the Native mind. We have seen that, in Bombay, ns at Calcutta, from the 
time at which effective arrangements have been made for the higher branches of 
instruction in English, the understandings of the students have been thoroughly 
interested and routed, and that the consequences have wonderfully, te tpe the words 
of the Calcutta Committee of Public Instruction in 1831, 11 Buqwsscd expectation/' 
The difficulty which attends this course is the very important one, not of principle, 
but of practice, nnmely, that the wants and circumstances of our Indian population 
bring to our College** *o few who desire, or are able to receive from us the complete 



* Not printed f»w ; but nt* p, xxxSx f* tif the Itrjort of thr Orntrat Coimnxttrc J83Q*W. 

Y 



* 



158 Selections from Educational Records 

Mmvte by Lord English education, which it is our object to impart to them. Those who look with 
Auckland) 1839 greater confidence to other methods of diffusing knowledge in this country, dwell 
jontd. especially upon this difficulty. Mr* Hodgson argues that wo have no reasonable 

ground to hope here for the same wide study of English Literature, and subsequent 
use of the information acquired in it for the purposes of vernacular composition, 
as occurred in the different stages of European civilization with reference to the 
Greek and Roman models from which that civilization was chiefly derived. His 
words are, * " True, the difficult and inapt science of Greece and Home was in modern 
Europe, first mastered in itself, and eventually worked into our own speech and 
minds. But how ? by the employment of means adequate to the end, — by tho 
existence of circumstances most powerfully efficient to forward that end. A thou- 
sand predisposing causes led a mighty nobility to seek in this lore the appropriate 
ornament of their rank and station. A church which monopolised a third of the 
wealth of the continent, called Rome its mother and Greece its foster mother : and 
throughout the great part of that continent, tho law, ecclesiastical and civil, 
was even lingually Roman* Hence the magnificent endowments and establishments 
and permanent inducements of all lands by which a difficult and exotic learning was 
at length effectually naturalised amongst us. Hence the scholar, if ho pleased, 
might pursue in retirement letters as a profession, assured of a comfortable provision 
for life ; or, if he pleased, he might devote himself to the task of instructing the 
scions of a most influential and wealthy nobility, all of them, from peculiar associa- 
tion, necessitated to become his pupils, whether they profited by his lessons or not, 
and thereby affording Mm the certainty of fin enduring means of livelihood ; or if 
he pleased, he might pass from the cloister or the college into the world, and there 
find the greater part of its most important* concerns subservient to the uses and 
abuses of his peculiar gifts." , 

14. Mr. Wilkinson has also on different occasions remarked that it seems to him 
that Education in English should be confined for the present to the Presidencies 
and to some of the principal provincial stations, as being the only places at which 
there is yet an actual demand for it,* 

15. Mr. Adam saysf of the condition of our English scholars, " Extraordinary 
efforts have been made to extend a knowledge of the English language to the.Natives, 
but those who have more or less profited by the opportunities presented to them 
do not 'find much scope for their attainments which on the other hand little fit 
them for the ordinary pursuits of native society. They have not received a good 
Native education, and the English education they have received finds little, if any, 
use. There is thus a want of sympathy between them and their countrymen, 



* Miscellaneous Essays, pp. 315-316. 

t Adam's Reports on Vernacular Education in Bengal and Beftar. Edited by J. Long, p. 304, 



I 



Minute hj Lord Auckland. 159 

although they constitute a class from which their countrymen might derive much Minnie by Lord 
benefit. There is also little sympathy between them and the foreign rulers of the Auckland, 1839 
country because they feel that they have been raised out of one class of society ~ contd. 
without having a recognized place in any other class." 

1G, But I believe that in all these opinions, the practical value of superior 
English acquirements is very greatly under-rated. A familiarity with the general 
principles of legislation and government, and the power of offering information or 
opinion upon public affairs in English reports (which is the form in which the higher 
correspondence regarding the British administration in India, will, of course, always 
bo conducted), must bo qualifications so directly useful, as (not to speak of the re- 
commendations of an improved moral character), to ensure to the possessors of them 
a preference for the most lucrative public employments, after they shall have 
acquired that knowledge of life and of business, and that good opinion among those 
who have had opportunities of witnessing their conduct, which mere book-learning 
never can bestow. There arc as yet, no doubt, circumstances of temporary opera- 
tion, which will keep for a period our best English scholars from reaping from their 
studies all the worldly profit which will ultimately accrue to them. Our course of 
instruction has not hitherto been so matured as to include any efficient and general 
arrangement for giving that knowledge* of morals, jurisprudence, law and fiscal 
economy which the Hon'blc Court have so wisely and earnestly insisted on, and 
which will be most directly usefttl in the discharge of administrative duties. There 
are oilier obstacles also which for a time may impede our young scholars in their 
desire to obtain public office. They may overestimate their own pretensions, 
and decline to*accept the subordinate situations which alone it may at first be 
thought right to entrust to thorn. The euro for such exaggerated expectations 
will come with time. When this class of candidates becomes more numerous, there 
will be a less hesitation with many of them in taking lower appointments. In the 
meanwhile, it is known that I am not disposed to adopt any special means, which 
could be felt as doing injustice to the rest of the community, for connecting our 
educated English students with the public service. The subject has been fully 
discussed in my Minute in the Judicial* Department of September 4th, 1838, the 
completion of tho measures consequent on which I am anxiously awaiting. The 
scheme proposed by the Hon'blc the President in Council, to which, in that respect, 
I assented in tho Minute referred to, included, however, the appointment of a 
limited number of Native assistants to some of the best of our Zillah Judges, who 
would be instructed in the forms and practice of office. And so far there would bo 
an immediate opening for tho employment of several of our students. The general 
character of my recommendations in that Minute was, however, to establish a 



* Sec para. 5 o( tho Nolo [A.]. 



1G0 Selections from Educational Records 



Minute by Lord test of qualification before selection for the honourable and responsible situation of 
Auckland, 1839 a Moonsiff, for all candidates, wheresoever and in whatever language instructed 
contd, anc | to procure the^cotnpilation and printing of Manuals of legal instruction, in the 

Native tongues as well as in English which might be taught everywhere by private 
Masters or in public Institutions* To the principle of this plan I would steadily 
adhere* But in our Colleges I would carry instruction of this kind further than 
would be the aims of these Manuals, which would be more proper for use in 
our common schools. Having thus supplied Suitable aids for the acquisition of the 
knowledge most requisite in public life, I would look with assured confidence to the 
recognition by the community of the advantages of an advanced English educa- 
tion, comprising those branches of studj r , a conservancy with which would place 
an instructed Native Gentleman on a level with our best European Officers, It is 
true, and no one has more heartily concurred and rejoiced in the determination 
than myself, that the vernacular tongues, and not English, will be the future lang- 
uages of the courts and the offices in the interior of the country. But this circum- 
stance will in no degree detract from the force of those inducements to English 
study, of which, as regards the vast and most important correspondence which must 
ever be conducted in English, I have just spoken. Nor need I dwell on the degree 
to which such inducements will be increased to the mere fact of English being the 
language of the ruling and governing class in India. This is an encouragement 
to the pursuit of English that will probably greatly counterbalance the want, 
which has boen justly noticed by Mr. Hodgson, of those motives to its cultivation 
which would have existed in such strength had English been here, as the Classical 
languages were in the West, the established language of Theology* and of law. 

17. It will be observed that I have referred chiefly to inducements connected 
with employment in the public service as likely to lead Indian students to ask admis- 
sion to our Colleges, This, we may be satisfied, is the principal motive which will 
as yet operate to bring them to any of our educational Institutions. Excepting 
perhaps partially in Calcutta (and possibly, though I am not informed on the point, 
at Bombay) the wealthy and higher classes of India do not send their sons to public 
Colleges and Schools. Those who come to us for instruction are in search of the 
-means of livelihood either in places under the Government, or in situations under 
individuals, which in the peculiar constitution of the Indian Government and 
society, bring them, in a greater or less degree, in connection with the public admi- 
nistration* I mention this point as explanatory of the importance to be attached 
to the nature of the instruction communicated to our students. The remark applies 
with equal force to our institutions for the study of the Classical learning of the 
East. Putting aside the money stipends which were formerly allowed, the great 
object of the students in the Sanscrit and Arabic Colleges of the Government has 
been to rise to office as Law Pundits and Moulvces in the courts. The knowledge 



Minute by Lord Auckland 



161 



which gains for men, reputation and profit among the Native community, as grea t Minnie by Lord 
^religious teachers, or among the Hindoos as proficients in Astrology is not to be Auckland, 1839 
acquired at those colleges and will best be obtained elsewhere from private Native — contd. 
instructors. If there bo not a demand for the same number of Law Pundits and 
Moulvees as previously, the attendance at the Colleges may be expected to decline, 
though in the Arabic in a much less degree than in the Sanscrit Colleges ; for 
Mahomedan studies fit men far more than those of Hindoo learning for all the 
active offices of life. 

18. What has been said may suffice to prove that there are weighty and daily 
growing inducements to the pursuit of English education, if directed with a proper 
attention to the wants of Scholars and to practical results. It remains that means 
should be furnished, at least to the most promising of the Scholars, to continue 
their studies to the desired completion, as incontestihle proof appears to have been 
given* that their poverty would otherwise generally compel them to retire from 
College as soon after their leaving boyhood as an opportunity of securing a provision 
for their subsistence might be open to them. On tltis point I will immediately 
remark separately — but I would here again say that I am of opinion, in full concur- 
rence with the President in Council, that whatever amount of reward and support 
for meritorious students may be granted to those attached to our English, should 
be granted also in perfectly like proportion in our Oriental Institutions. The pledge 
to maintain these latter institutions while resorted to by the people involved to my 
mind the clear obligation to maintain them with all the conditions which arc judged 
necessary for the general efficiency of our educational schemes. 

19. Assuming upon the preceding reasoning that our aim as regards those 
seminaries of highest learning which arc not, like the learned Eastern Colleges, espe- 
cially assigned to other objects, should be to communicate European knowledge 
through the medium of the English language, it is next to be considered what should 
be the character of the minor academies or schools such as may probably be even- 
tually established at every zillah station, 

20. I have not stopped to state that correctness and elegance in vernacular 
composition ought to be sedulously attended to in the Superior Colleges. This is a 
matter of course in the scheme of instruction. But a question may well be raised 
whether in the Zillah Schools, the subject matter of instruction ought not to be 
conveyed principally through the vernacular rather than the English medium. 

21. I would certainly be much in favour of that course if I saw any solid reason 
to believe that instruction of a common order would more readily and largely bo 
accepted from the Government in the one mode than the other. I am quite of 
opinion that a very valuable amount of useful knowledge may bo easily conveyed, 



* Soo detail*) at the cloau oE para. 8, and iu p.mui. 10 and 15 of Nolo [A,]* 



162 Selections from Educational Records 

Uimite by Lord wlien good class books and persons competent to teafeh from them are provided 
Auckland, 1839 through the means of the vernacular languages. And while I am satisfied that 
— contd. some not trivial amount of moral and intellectual stimulus and improvement is 

obtained from the Minor English Schools at present existing yet the standard of 
proficiency in them is probably not so great as that the mass of Scholars in them 
would not be merely as much gainers from merely vernacular tuition- 

22. It is an argument for the use of the vernacular medium in such schools/ 
bhat after the first expense of preparing school books has been incurred instruction 
in that manner would, it may be expected, be more economical than through English, 
which requires the employment of an English master on a salary at least two or three 
times as high as would be adequate for a native teacher who had received an English 
education and was at the same time perfectly conversant with his own tongue. 
Employment as a Schoolmaster would also be a natural and proper provision for 
studious young men who had gone through a complete course at the English 
Colleges. Such a master would of course be able to instruct a class attached to a 
vernacular school in the first elements of English learning, so as to lay a found- 
ation for those who wished further to prosecute that study. 

23. It is a deduction from the saving which the substitution of Native for 
English Masters in the Zillah Schools might produce that English superintendence 
over several circles of such schools would probably for a long period be indispens- 
able and a charge on that account must be estimated for* It is also to be reckoned 
that the cost of compiling and translating a proper series of a vernacular class books 
is likely to be considerably greater than might at first be supposed. 

24. I would speak with much respect of the authority of Mr. "Wilkinson on this 
subject. But I will avow that I am by no means convinced of the applicability 
of his system or suggestions to the objects of a common education. It is at least 
not certain that he will in the end carry the body of Hindoo Astronomers along with 
him in his correction of prevalent errors. In any event it is not the abstruse parts 
of the Mathematical Science which could be of use in our'Zillah Schools. In fact 
Mr. Wilkinson's system is almost wholly dependent on his own eminent personal 
talents and exertions, his admirable^zeal, his great knowledge, the weight of his 
excellent character, and perhaps also, it should not be concealed, the influence at- 
taching to his position as the British Political Agent. It would not be safe to draw 
conclusion as to what may best be done by ordinary agents within the British Pro- 
vinces from what have been accomplished in vernacular instruction by Mr. Wilkin- 
son in Sehore. Some of his remarks too as to the failure of attempts at English 
education within foreign states are not good grounds for anticipating failure within 
our own Districts, where other circumstances and motives are in operation. 

25. I do not admit into this discussion the question of promoting at the present 
time the formation of a body of vernacular literature. Instruction through the 



i 



^ Minute by Lord Auckland 163 

vernacular languages to a definite extent for ordinary purposes may possibly be, as Mimde by Lord 
the readiest mode to the attainment o£ those purposes, proper and desirable. But Auckland, 1839 
anything like a body of enlarged literature can, I am thoroughly convinced, be — contd. 
created only with time, by the unprompted exertions of private authors, when a 
general demand for such literature shall have arisen among the people. The 
Honorable Court have in a passage, which has been quoted,* declared themselves 
strongly in favour of a liberal encouragement of Native private authors and trans- 
lators and I would by no means dissent widely from their views, though the en- 
couragement must be given with judgment or the Government will be constantly 
in hazard of aiding mediocrity or premature and ill-directed efforts. But these 
are considerations apart from the settlement of the plans of school instruction 
on which we are now engaged. 

26. I have thus stated what has seemed most important on the subject of 
introducing the vernacular medium in our common District Schools ; I mean, as to 
the general principle of such a change, for the measure could not be named as one 
for very early adoption, with no class books prepared or teachers versed in those 
books yet trained for their duties. And as the contrary system has been actually 
established, it is right that, unless urgent reasons for abandoning that system 
demanded attention, it should be fully tried, with the improvements of which it 
may fairly be susceptible* We may, indeed, be said to have two great experiments 
in progress, one in the Bengal, the other in the Bombay Provinces, the Provincial 
education being in the former conducted chiefly through the English, in the latter 
almost, if not quite exclusively, through the vernacular languages. It will be 
most interesting that both experiments should be closely watched and thoroughly 
developed. It is possible that in Bengal, in aiming at too much, we may have 
withheld some facilities for acquiring knowledge which might otherwise have 
advantageously been left open. And in Bombay the standard of proficiency in the 
Mofussil Schools may have been fixed and allowed to remain too low, with no 
principle in the scheme by which they are regulated which would constantly 
animate exertion, and maintain a spirit of progressive improvement, 

27. The immediate practical question in respect to Bengal seems to be that 
w*hich I have before mentioned — namely*, whether it may be reasonably supposed 
that a vernacular would be more readily and largely accepted in our District Schools 
than * an English education, and on this subject I am not able, after much careful 
reflection, to discover any reasons which could lead me to answer the proposition 
in the affirmative. Native youths will not come to our schools to be instructed in 
vernacular composition. This qualification is more quickly and easily to be at- 
tained from other sources. We can in those schools draw little, if any, aid from 

existing native literature. The desire for the new ideas and information which 

— ■ — ■ — ■ — ■ — - ■ ■ — -- - — ** ■— - — ■ ■ • — - — - — — - - - — - — " m - — • > 

* See para, 3 of the Note [A.]* 



164 Selections from Educational Records 

i 

Minute by Lord will be imparted to tliem must therefore be among the great inducements to attend- 
Auckland, 1S39 ance, and those who are candidates for such instruction will not, I think, in any 
— contd. important degree be deterred by having to undergo also the labour of learning the 

English character and language- The fact indeed is, as it is to be presumed from 
the evidence which has been recorded* on the subject, that a knowledge of the 
English language itself with a view to the business, however humble, of life, is one 
main object of most of the scholars* It is fortunate that in the pursuit of such an 
object, they can be led on to higher studies and ends. For mere instruction of a 
general nature (such as our masters now give) through the vernacular medium, it 
may, it seems to me, well be doubted whether even the number* of pupils would 
seek our schools, who now resort to them* 

28. On the other hand, I confess that I regard it as a serious defect in our plans 
that we have compiled no proper series of vernacular class books. It is obviously 
desirable that, as we have vernacular classes, the books used in them should not 
only be correct and elegant in style, but should be themselves^ of the most useful 
description. I would urge also the justness and importance of the .advicef of 
the Honorable Court that such a series of class books should be prepared under one 
general scheme of control and superintendence* Much expense will thereby be saved 
and efficiency greatly promoted. The cost would equitably and willingly be divided 
among many parties. The works would either be selections from English books 
of instruction already published, or original compilations adapted for Native pupils. 
In either case the charge of the first selection or compilation in English would bo 
borne in past by the Education funds of Bengal, and in part by those of the other 
Presidencies, especially by those of Bombay where such works must be urgently 
required for the vernacular Schools in /the Interior. The new Patsala of Calcutta, 
the projectors of which have proposed a good series of works, would also of course 
contribute, and aid might be expected from benevolent individuals or associations in 
different parts of India. The present opportunity is favourable to entering on the 
undertaking. When the books shall have been prepared in English they will after- 
wards, as the Honorable Court have observed, be translated at each Presidency 
into the Vernacular languages current in it, but the first step for all the Presidencies 
must be the primary compilation. . I would then place the body, which at present 
represents the Government in the direction of Native education, in communication 
with the Committee of Public Instruction at Calcutta and make it my first injunc- 
tion to the latter Committee in concert with the managers of the Hindoo College, 
Patsala, or others, to draw a definite scheme of the several sets of books wanted 
for instruction through the vernacular languages in Seminaries of ordinary Educa- 
tion — then to consider and report by what means and at what estimated cost, to 

■ ■ . ... _ iii _ . _ i - - — ■ ■ — ^ ^ M r— i m— — 

* Note. — Paras. 10 to 15 supra [A.]* 

t Sec extract of dispatch cited in para* 3G of No to [A.], 



Minute by Lord Auchlatid 



165 



be distributed among what parties, these books can be drawn up, and with what Minute by Lord 
further cost the printing of them would be attended. With this information before Auckland, 1839 
them, the Government can determine on the completion of the plan and on the — contd. 
amount of funds which can properly, independent of the usual income of the Com- 
mittee, be assigned to it. 

29* I need scarcely repeat that I look with particular favour on the sugges- 
tions of the managers of the Patsala for including in the list of works Treatises on 
the elements of Law, general and local, of Political Economy and of Morals. 

30. When the series of class books shall have been printed, and especially 

when these further Manuals of the precedents, rules 

Do* a^me?t ed "* ^ Logis,ative aild practice of our Courts to which my Minute in , 

the Judicial Department of September 4th, 1838,* 
referred, shall have been added to them and made a part of instruction, it is more 
probable than at present that students will attend the vernacular classes of our 
5;illah schools for the sake of the general and practical knowledge to be acquired at 
them. In that stage of progress it would be my second direction to the Calcutta 
Education Committee to relaxf their rule for the discontinuance of separate 
vernacular instruction, and to allow students to attend the full course of English or 
vernacular tuition as they might themselves prefer. 

31. The day however when all this can be accomplished, may yet be distant. 
It is easy to wish for and to project such compilations as will be requisite for the 
purpose, but the means in India for the efficient execution of them are unavoidably 
limited, and in this respect, as in other parts of our endeavours, we must expect 
delays and partial disappointments. 

32. Meanwhile, we have to improve the Institutions which are established, 
and to make the most of them for the great end sought for. My leading recom- 
mendation on this point would be so to connect our zillah schools with the central 
.Colleges as to give from the latter to the ablest students of the zillah schools a 
stimulus that will carry them beyond the ordinary range of instruction which 
is reached by the mass of the zillah pupils. Without such a stimulus we shall 
fall far short of the point which we must desire to gain in the promotion of national 
improvement. 

33. This brings me to the question of pecuniary scholarships for meritorious 
students, for such a stimulus as I have spoken of is scarcely to be given excepting by 
attaching, in some form, scholarships of that description to the central Colleges to 
which the best of the zillah scholars may be eligible. On the general question regard- 
ing pecuniary support to promising students to enable them to perfect their studies, 
I think that I may content myself by referring to the facts and opinions which have 

- - • — — ■ — ' ■ ■ - - — — ■ 

f Sco Note para, 6 [A. 



166 Selections from Educational Records 

• 

Minute by Lord been detailed on this point, and I will only therefore profess my decided adoption 
Auckland. 1839 of tlie principle laid down by the Honorable Court in the words which I shall again 
— contd. quote from their Despatch of September 29th, 1830,* <f Provided," they say, " that 

the privilege of scholarships is restricted to young men who have afforded proopof a 
peculiar capacity a?id industry , it appears to us to be a highly usefal and proper mode 
of encouraging and facilitating their acquisition of high attainments" My tjhird 
present direction to the Calcutta Committee wonld now ? therefore, be to consider 
and report with all expedition on the details of a scheme for assigning a certain 
number of Scholarships to all our higher Seminaries — those in the English and 
Oriental Colleges being in an equal ratio. In consequence of the very general 
poverty of the students I would fix the ratio on a higher scale say at one-fourth of 
the number of pupils, if that number " should afford proof of peculiar capacity and 
industry." I do not suggest Scholarships in our ordinary Schools, as the most 
deserving pupils of those will best be provided for in the Colleges, and the average 
efficiency of such schools can well be maintained by honorary prizes or single dona- 
tions of money. Of the College Scholarships it may perhaps be the most convenient 
in the first instance that some should bo assigned, in regular rotation, to be competed 
for by the pupils of each zillah School. The amount ought from the commence- 
ment to be enough for the decent subsistence of a Native Student, and there might 
be some small increase admitted after a year or two, as an incentive to continued 
effort. On the other hand; the Scholarship should be forfeited, if a proper standard 
of attainment were not exhibited at each yearly examination. I Would not grant 
Scholarships for a year only, liable to be then lost, if, upon the chance of an examina- 
tion another competitor might stand higher on the list, for the uncertain tenure 
of the emolument would be very unfavourable to hearty, consistent study. But I 
would provide, by such safeguard as I have mentioned, against the growth of in- 
dolence or indifference in the Student. Four years is an ordinary period for holding 
such Scholarships at home and it may be sufficient here. The following is the scheme 
of the Flaherty Scholarships in the University College, London, taken from the 
report of the Council of that Institution for 1838. " They (the Council) have 
determined 1 o apply the income of this fund towards the formation of the scholar- 
ships to be called Flaherty Scholarships, which, at the same time that they stimulate 
and reward the exertions of the students, might commemorate the zeal and muni- 
ficence of this body. This donation, increased by the investment of the surplus 
dividends until the Scholarships are in full operation, together with the sum of 
£250 supplied by the Council out of the funds of the College, will constitute a fund 
, producing £200 per annum which will be sufficient to create four scholarships, each 
amounting to £50 annually for four years. One of these Scholarships will be vacant 



* Evidence of 1S32, Agp. I, No, 11 [343/490], also in Madras Selections, ii> 1855, p. xl t 



V 



Minnie by Lord Auckland 



107 



every year, and it is to bo given in alternate years to the best proficient in Classical Minute by Lor A 
languages and in Mathematics and in natural Phillosophy. The first is intended Auckland, 1839 
to be given in the present year to the best proficient in Mathematics aud natural — contd. 
Philosophy/* 

3 L I would state to the Education Committee that it is the wish of Govern- 
ment eventually to bring the Medical* College at Calcutta within our general 
scheme on this subject. But I would not press any immediate proposition to that 
effect. It will be enough to request now that the General Committee report 
specially in each of their successive yearly reports, whether they think that the 
time has arrived at which the assimilation could property bo introduced. 

35* The Fourth point on which I would at present give instructions' to the 
Education Committee, is as to the preference to be given to rendering tho highest 
instruction efficient in a certain number of Central Colleges, rather than employing 
thefr funds in the extension of the plan of founding ordinary zillah Schools. 1 
would have the places fixed, with reference to extent of population or convenience 
of locality, at which it should be the aim gradually to buildup these efficient Central 
Colleges, I would, on a first conjecture, name for them Dacca, Pntna, Benares, or 
Allahabad, Agra, Delhi and ultimately, though probably at a distant date, Barcilly. 
At the^c places, as well as at the Colleges of the Metropolis the course of instruction 
should be carefully widened and perfected as opportunities offer. The Scholarships 
to be established at them will provide a class of students, prepared to avail them- 
selves of the utmost advantages which they can afford, and real progress will thus 
be made, to the good effects of which wc can look forward with reasonable hope. 
The Committee can act on this view only according to the actual state of circimi- 
btances from time to time. At Agra and Delhi, there is already a demand for higher 
instruction, which ought to be satisfied with the least delay possible Elsewhere, 
perhaps the condition of tho Institutions may not call for, or admit of, immediate 
improvement. Where there is no strong occasion for the enlargement of the existing 
Schools into Colleges, tho founding of other Schools may occasionally be tho be^t 
and wisest appropriation of the educational income. But I would point it out 
to the Committee that tho first of these objects, when practicable, is to have a 
declared priority of attention. I would especially invite tho Committee to report 
how the studies connected with Jurisprudence, Government, and Morals, may be 
most readily introduced into our superior Colleges, and particularly whether very 
early arrangements cannot be made for tho purpose in tho Hindoo College at 
Calcutta. The revision of the system of Scholarships in that college, so as to obviate 
the too general course of early withdrawal from instruction, which is now com- 
plained of, should have early consideration* Another object in these superior 



* Sco pnra«. 20 tind 21 of Note [A.J. 



1 



168 Selections from Educational Records 

Minute by Lord Colleges ought to be to instruct the pupils, or Some proportion of them, for the 
Auckland^ 1839 duties of the inferior school masters, — and to this end, they should be made tho- 
— contd. roughly masters of the class books and legal or other manuals which are designed 

to be used in the lower schools, and with the branches of knowledge which relate 
to the subject comprised in them. Lastly, in order to make the greatest use of the 
advantages of the Colleges, I would attentively watch the degree to which the stu- 
dents profit by their access to the considerable Libraries which are now attached 
to many of our Institutions. Important deficiencies in those Libraries should be 
promptly supplied. A regular register should be kept of the books read by each 
student, the advancement made in general knowledge by the perusal of these books 
should be tested by examination, and rewards should be given to the most proficient, 
and the subject of the employment made of the Libraries should be one for special 
notice in the annual reports regarding each Institution. 

36. If instructions founded upon these observations, should with the con- 
currence of the President in Council be communicated to the Calcutta General 
Committee, I would be glad that it should be added to them that, if the Committee 
should doubt the feasibility of attaching scholarships to Central Golleges on some 
such general scheme as has been Suggested for the improvement of the pupils of 
the zillah Schools, they will then submit such other recommendations as~they may 
think most likely to promote th3 object contemplated by that scheme, — the 
advancement of the best pupils of the body of our scholars beyond the present scale 
of common acquirement being regarded as a point of the first importance in our 
educational plans/ 

37. I have not more to observe on the immediate guidance of the measures 
of the Calcutta Committee. Before leaving the subject, however, I would say that 
the day may come when unity and efficiency of supervision will better be secured 
by having a single Superintendent of our Government Seminaries with an adequate 
establishment than by retaining the existing large Committee of Members, acting 
gratuitously in the intervals of other laborious duties, and so numerous as neces- 
sarily to cause a frequent inconvenience in the dispatch of business. At present 
I am satisfied that the varied knowledge possessed by the Members of the Com- 
mittee renders their services most valuable to the Government and I would grate- 
fully retain their aid. But I should be happy to receive from them a report of their 
suggestions on the means of procuring an occasional local inspection of the Institu- 
tions under their charge. The experience of Sir Edward Ryan, their President, 
will have convinced him that there may be great hazard of the interests of educa- 
tion being seriously retarded by the want of such inspection. 

38. For the Bombay and Madras Presidencies, it may be convenient to place 
those Governments in possession of the substance of the review which has been 
taken of the facts relative to the progress of education in all parts of India, and 



Minute by Lord Auckland 1G9 

to communicate to them also tho Resolution which may finally bo adopted by tho Minute by Lord 
Government, explanatory o{ its general views on the suggestions which I have Auckland, 1839 
offered, and of the orders that may he issued for the guidance of the Committee in COI1 td. 
Calcutta, These Governments should bo especially invited to co-operate, through 
the bodies charged with tho control of Public Instruction under their superinten- 
dence, in the common object of aiding the preparation of an useful and compre- 
hensive set of class books, to bo afterwards rendered into the vernacular tongues 
of the several Provinces. In this, as in othor p*rfcs of the Government, it is a matter 
of high importance that there should bo a thorough understanding among tho 
different Presidencies of the principles observed and plans followed out in oach, that 
the experience of one should bo made known for tho benefit of all, and that all should 
work together in the pursuit of the desired result, Tho Bombay Government I 
would particularly request to consider the measures which I have contemplated 
for raiding, and adapting to Native wants tho instruction convoyed in tho most 
advanced of our English Colleges. I would a^k also for a distinct and detailed 
report on the condition of its Mofussil vernacular Schools, the precise nature and 
range of the education given in them whether at Suddcr Stations or in tho interior 
towns and villages, the manner in which tho teachers at cither class of schools aro 
selected and remunerated— whether (as has been before alluded to) by superintend- 
ing and rewarding tho teachers of the village schools who have not been trained in 
any of our own Seminaries f^eusiblo good has been effected, whether, where there is 
no regular European Superintendence, these interior schools aro kept in a state of 

real efficiency, whether inducements in the grant 
AV'.— On ihh pomi attention of Scholarships are, and if they aro not, whethor 

?V«. d w' -r^^lyv thcy umy not wcl1 bc ' bcld out to ! ho bc f* scholars 

note on the inckwanl «tMo of of the isilhth schools to prosecute their studios further, 

fS'or^o* te1bS B W«t' and t0 ac * uiro llu Roving knowledge* of European 

larrfui*. fA,] literature, what aro the gonoral inducements which 

bring pupils to the schools, and whether good con- 
duct in them ordinarily leads, as appear to have been approved by tho Honorable 
Court, to employment in the public service. It may bo explained that 
under this Government there has been caro taken to withhold anything 
like a monopoly of the public sendee 7 from tho Scholars of its institutions, 
general tests open to all candidates, and selection by local Officers with regard to 
known character as well as proficiency in learning, being considered tho proper 
grounds for nomination to Public Office. If the lads from the schools aro drafted 
largely into official situations, opinions from tho European Officers under whom 
they have served as to the degree of superior fitness exhibited by thorn would bo of 
value. It is probable that Captain Candy, Superintendent of tho Schools in tho 
Dockan and of tho Sanscrit College, could condonso the materials for such a report 



170 Selections horn Educational Records 

Minute by Lord and submit it, with his own comments, without much delay. He will especially 
Auckland^ 1839 sa y whether the general standard of acquirement in the vernacular school is as 
concld. forward as he could desire and whether he would recommend the establishment 

of English Schools, with a due arrangement of merit Scholarships, in a few of the 
interior districts. He will explain also what is his system in regard to the Sanscrit 
College at Poona, what improvements through the introduction of European know- 
ledge have been attempted and with what success, and what is the extent and 
promise of the English Classes. 

39. Of the Government of Madras I would ask for the information of the 
present state of Education under the direction or encouragement of the State, within 
those Territories, and as to what proceedings were taken consequent on the expressed 
desire of the Honorable Court for the foundation of an English College at Madras* ^ 
The Madras Presidency is remarkable in India as being that in which knowledge 
of the mere English language is most diffused among all who are attached in public 
or private capacities to European Officers ; but comparatively little appears on 
any reports before me, to have been done in order to make such a knowledge con- 
ducive to moral and intellectual advancement. 

40. In concluding this paper, I have to express my regret if it should have 
extended to an inconvenient length. But the importance of the subject will be my 
excuse with my colleagues for my having treated it in this manner, with a view to 
the suggestion of such practical conclusions as may correct existing defects, diffuse 
more accurate information, and possibly have some effect in satisfying and recon- 
ciling opposite opinions. 

(Sd.) AUCKLAND. 

Delhi : 
November 24th, 1839 r 



(41) Extracts from a Note by J. R. Colvin, Private Secretary to the 
Governor General, referred to in Lord Auckland's minute of November 
24th 1839* 

Bengal. 

J- R. Cohin's In Bengal the chief efforts of the Government and its Agents were for a long 

note. period directed to the communication of Instruction through the Medium of the 

SanscriWnd Arabic languages at Colleges established in different parts of the coun- 
try. An expose of their principles is contained in a report of the former Committee 

* Printed in the '.Report of the General Committee of Public Instruction, 1S39 40, p. adiii f. 



Note by J. R. Colvin 171 

of Public Instruction dated in December 1831. It was thought right to encourage J. R, Colvin 9 s 
the acquirement of the Native literature of Hindoos-and Mahomedans, and to note— contd. 
engraft improvements upon such studies, as a means of gaining over the influential 
and learned classes, the Pundits and Mowluvees who, it was hoped would act with the 
best effect on the rest of their Countrymen, English Glasses were, however, from 
time to time, established in some of the Institutions and distinct English Seminaries 
at the seats of others. The English class of the Mudrusa at Calcutta has not 
succeeded but the failure is probably to be ascribed to accidental causes. Mr. 
Piinsep states in his note of July 5th, 1839, " I know that the desire to learn English 
and to master the rudiments of European Science is growing fast among the Mahom- 
adans.' 1 A class of instruction in the Regulations of Government has been created 
in the Mudrusa with excellent promise. The translation of one or two European 
works of science into Arabic was commenced but, from whatever cause, the 
prospect of benefit from the attempts in this respect was not, on the whole, 
satisfactory* A most anxious and praiseworthy attention was given by the former 
Committee to the improvement of the English Institutions under their superin- 
tendence, as far as the funds, which they thought themselves warranted in 
aligning to them, admitted. The Hindoo College at Calcutta, which was founded 
by the personal desire and voluntary contribution of the Hindoo Gentlemen of 
Calcutta, particularly benefited by their care, and specially by the increasing 
attention of their able Secretary, Dr, H. H, Wilson, who was visitor of the College. 
Of the effects of English education at this college their report before alluded to 
says, " The consequence has surpassed expectation. A command of the English 
language and a familiarity with its literature and science have been acquired to an 
extent rarety equalled hy any schools in Europe, Another generation will 
piobably witness a very material alteration in the notions and feelings of the 
educated classes of the Hindoo Community of Calcutta," The Honorable Court 
had remarked on the same subject in their Despatch of September 29th, 1830.* 
" But the Vidyalya or Anglo-Indian College originally established by the Natives 
themselves for the study of the English language and for education through the 
medium of that language exclusively, has had more decided success than either 
of the Calcutta colleges. The number of scholars is now 436, of whom all except 
100 pay for their tuition. The progress of these pupils is highly encouraging/' 
The Hindoo College was distinguished, in the above point of the payments made 
by its pupils, from the other institutions under the Committee, where a system 
of general alimentary allowances for the support of students had been long in 
force. These allowances, were, I believe, only given after a previous strict examin- 
ation as to qualifications acquired by applying for admission to the Government 



* 

* Jiuloce of 1832, Afp. 1> No. 11 [340/494]. 



Selections from Educational Records 



J, R. Colvin's Colleges, and they upheld therefore, to some extent the principle of forwarding 
wofc—contd. only merit and industry. But these general money grants were, as will ho seen 

from a subsequent extract from the Honorable Court's Despatch before cited, 
felt at an early period to be open to much objection, for it was always doubtful 
whether the chief inducement of every student was not rather to obtain a mere 
provision for his subsistence, than to acquire a knowledge which experience had 
shown to be calculated to be useful or acceptable to himself or his countrymen. 
The last point which needs to be noticed in respect to the former measures of the 
Committee of Public Instruction is that the Committee were averse generally 
to the employment of their limited funds in the support of mere elementary 

education. Their professed object was to give a 
* See as regards Chinsurali a higher education to advanced students. They did, 

notice of the subject on page 130 - a . , . , . • i * i i • 

of Mr. Adam's Third Report however, in tw T o instances, in a circle of schools m 
[ J R * c ]• the neighbourhood of Chinsurali in the lower Pro- ' 

vinces, and in the Ajmere Territory in Western 
India, admit exceptions to their usual rule, but in both these cases the result was 
a ^discouraging failure. 

******* 

7. The latest published Report of the Committed for 1837, gives the following 
view of the number, state and cost of the institutions under their charge. It will 
be remembered that the third or distinct vernacular class, is that which has now 
been discontinued. 



# 

*- 


Number of 
the pupils 
at the end 
of 1837. 


Average 
monthly 
expenditure 




First Class, Oriental Classical. 




Us. 


A. 


p- 


Calcutta Sanscrit College ..... 


122 


1,358 


0 


0 


Benares Sanscrit College ..... 


178 


1,263 


0 


0 


Calcutta Arabic College ...... 


125 


1,950 


0 


0 


Delhi Arabic and Persian College .... 


91 


800 


0 


0 


Delhi Sanscrit Department . - . 


32 


100 


0 


0 


Agra Arabic and Persian Department 


113 


284 


0 


0 


College of Mohd. Mohsin, Persfan Department. 


274 


1,500 


0 


0 


Faruckabad Madrassa ...... 


... 


... 






Nizamut College 


• ♦ • 


... 






Allahabad Persian and Oordoo . 


48 


40 


0 


0 


TOTAL 


983 


7.295 


0 


0 



Note by J. R. CoVoin 



173 



Number of 
the pupils 
at the end 
of 1837. 



Average 
monthly 
expenditure. 



J, It. Colvin's 
note — contd. 



Bs, A* P* 

Second Class, Anglo-Vernacular. 



Hindoo Collegef • 


451 


4,059 


0 


0 


Benares Seminary 


147 


527 


0 


0 


College of Mohd. Mohsin, English Department * 


750 


3,000 


0 


0 


College, Hooghly Branch School * 


227 


225 


0 


0 


Madrissa English School 


151 


650 


0 


0 


Agra College, English Department . 


151 


1,288 


0 


0 


Delhi Institution * 


84 


709 


0 


0 


Allahabad School 


91 


465 


0 


0 


Dacca School 


314 


536 


0 


0 


Meemt School 


80 


405 


0 


0 


Gowhatty School 


154 


279 


0 


0 


Chittagong School 


80 


150 


0 


0 


Midnapore School 


79 


305 


0 


0 


Patna School ♦ 


109 


383 


0 


0 


Nizatnut College, English 


109 


500 


0 


0 




80 


177 


o 


o 


Ajmere School 


48 


305 


0 


0 


oaugor ocnooi 


144 


297 


o 


o 


Ghazeepore School 


69 


200 


0 


0 


Moulmein School * 


55 


370 


0 


0 


Goruckpore School 


50 


200 


0 


0 


lurucliabad School 


55 


275 


0 


0 


Jubbulporo School 


24 


125 


0 


0 


Hoshingabad School 


23 


70 


0 


0 


Bhaugulporo School 


52 


300 


0 


0 


* 

Pooree School 


33 


118 


0 


0 

# 


Bareilly School 


CO 


250 


0 


0 


Comxnillah School 


88 


300 


0 


0 


Saugor School 


88 


209 


0 


0 


Azimghur School ....... 


41 


150 


0 


0 


Arrah School 


33 


100 


0 


0 


Total . 


3,926 


16,927 


0 


0 



\ The Hindoo College receives from tho general fund Rs. 2,398*6-4 monllily. It levies from 
the pupils abouT Bs. 1,500 monthlv (J. B* C.) 

2 a 



174 



Selections from Educational Records 



J. R. OolvirCs 
'note — contd. 



Third Class, Vernacular. 

Allahabad School . 
Ajmere School 
Agra College, Hindi 
Bhaugulpore Hill School 
Saugor, Hindi Department 
Hoshingabad, Hindi Department 

Total 
GRAND TOTAL . 



Number of 
the pupils 

at the end 
of 1837. 



Average 
monthly 
expenditure. 





lis. 


A. 


r, 


18 


27 


0 


0 


93 


G8 


0 


0 


75 


3G7 


0 


0 


05 


239 


0 


0 


134 


1G5 


0 


0 


99 


250 


0 


0 


484 


1,116 


0 


0 


5,393 


25,338 


0 


0 



* * # # :f: # * 

22. I now turn to a most interesting independent experiment in education 
which has been conducted under the superintendence and with the aid of the actual 
personal exertions of Sir- L. Wilkinson, the Political Agent at Bhopal. This gentle- 
man has organised schools at Sehore in which instruction is given through the 
medium of the Eastern learned, as well as the vernacular languages. There were 
74 boys in his Mahommedan, and 116 in his Hindee Lower School, and 24 students 
of the Sanscrit college reading the higher Mathematics and Grammar* In the lower 
classes, Mr. Wilkinson caused to be used all the printed school books that he could 
find, though he complains of their deficiency, excepting however particularly from 
this complaint some " admirable " Marathee books printed at Bombay, to which 
I shall refer in another place. His great efforts and success were in the Sanscrit 
branch of the higher class, " in which the Hindoo Mathematics and the Hindoo 
system of Astronomy are adopted as the foundation of the course of study. " Jhom 
the Sidhants, which are wholly free from the fables of the Poorans and which carry 
the students just to that point to which the Science of Astronomy had been carried 
in Europe when Copernicius, Newton and Galileo, appeared to point out and to 
establish that the sun and not the earth was the centre of our system," he unfolded 
and explained to the pupils all the principal facts of Astronomy proving and illus- 
trating the further truths of the science upon the basis afforded by those works. 
He is himself a Sanscrit scholar and an ardent student of the exact sciences, and 
though he modestly claims no credit to his own share in the tuition, it is yet certain 
that it is to his knowledge and indefatigable zeal that the great progress made is 
to be ascribed- The Native Teacher and three of his pupils visited Bombay in the 
early part of the year — and the extent of their acquirements may be estimated 
from the certificate of which an extract is given below, granted to them by one of 
the masters of the Scotch Missionary Schools at that place. " Rumeshwur 



4 



Note by J. R. Colvin 175 

Gooroojee and his three pupils have attended a general examination of our girls 5 J. J2. Colviris 
schools, and have inspected the classes and operations of our English Institutions, note — contd. 
They shewed great interest in Mathematics and Geometry and proved themselves ' 
to he well acquainted with these branches. I have had a good deal of conver- 
sation with them in private and find that they have a good knowledge of History 
and are remarkably well instructed in Astronomy* They appear to be both 
inquisitive and discerning and I have no doubt that they will derive much benefit 
from their visit to Bombay, Could they add a knowledge of English to their other 
accomplishments it would be a matter of the greatest consequence. Their case 
shews however (and it is cheering to observe it) how much may be done through the 
medium of the Native languages/* 

23. Mr, Wilkinson candidly states that the first effect at least of his use of the 
Sidhants to expose the absurd ideas usually prevalent among Hindoos from the 
authority of the Pooxans, was to rouse a very keen and general opposition among 
the Bramins in many parts of India. These are his words on the subject, " But 
as the class advanced, their new opinions and more especially the talented summary 
of them by Soobajec Bapoo* in his Sheromuni Prukash which has been widely 
circulated, have not failed to attract the attention and bring down upon them the 
condemnation of the most learned Shastrees and orthodox Pundits of Oojain, 
Poona, Benares, Mufchoora, Nagpore and Sutara, The Oojain Pundits contended 
for the unadulterated Poorans, denying that the earth was a sphere and asserting 
that Bapoo\s book was full of heterodoxy ; (the Muthoora Pundits) candidly, and 
with a keener foresight of the consequence of their study, pronounced the Sidhants 
and the whole Jyotish Shastrees (though acknowledged by all the Shastrus to be a 

Vedanaguf ) to be an infidel science ; The Nagpore 

VcL? r [f S n°C] 0t th ° EUCrCd Pundits dis P la y ed utter ignorance of the Sidhants. 

The Poona and Benares Pundits admitted the truth 
of both the Pooranic and Siddhantic system, and maintained that their contra- 
dictions were only apparent and might be reconciled. Our Sutara opponent alone 
sets the Poorans aside and contends for the truth of the Siddhants, condemning 
only the heterodoxy of our arresting the sun in his course to make him the centre 
of the system." 

******* 

Bombay. 

29. In Bombay exertions for the object were urgently pressed forward by the 
experienced and instructed mind of Mr, Elphinstone. He uses on the topic these 

* Bapu Deva Sftstri, who later on revised Wilkinson's translation of Bhaskara's Siddhanta Siro* 
mani. (Ed*) 

2 a2 



176 Selections from Educational Records 

J. R. Colvin's few and simple, but emphatic and memorable words,* — " In tbe meantime the 
note— contd. dangers to which, we are exposed from the sensitive character of the religion of the 

Natives, and the slippery foundation of our Government, owing to the total separa- 
tion between us and our objects, require the adoption of some measures to coun- 
teract them, and the only one is to remove their prejudices^ and to communicate our 
own principles and opinions by the diffusion of a rational education" 

30. The plans adopted under his auspices were of diffusing knowledge in the 
Provinces through the Vernacular Medium by the founding or assisting schools 
and by the preparation of class books and a system of improved superintendence. 
Means for an English education were afforded at the Presidency and an English 
class was, I believe, added to the Sanscrit College at Poona* Mr. Elphinstone's 
sentiments on the value of an English education and on the best means of creating 

' a demand for it were stated in para/ 27 of his minute of December 13th, 1823/J* 

u If English could be at all diffused among persons who have the least time for 
reflection the progress of knowledge, by means of it, would be accelerated in a ten- 
fold ratio, since every man who made himself acquainted with a science through 
the English would be able to communicate it in his own language to his country- 
men. At present however, there is but little desire to learn English with any such 
view. The first step towards creating such a desire, would be to establish a school 
at Bombay where English might be taught classically, and where instruction might 
also be given in that language on history, geography and the popular branches of 
science/' 

31. A discussion was at that period raised and subsequently maintained by 
Mr. Warden, a member of the Bombay Government and now a member of the 
Honorable Court, on the propriety, which he strongly pressed, of making English a 
primary instead of a secondary branch of the scheme of Education.! The remarks 
of the Court on these discussions were thus expressed in their Despatch of February 
18th, 1829. § " You will have gathered from that despatch, that we, on the whole, 
concur in the more comprehensive, and we think sounder views of your late Governor, 
and you will have perceived that we have sanctioned the whole of his plans, which, 
as he has himself observed, are not inconsistent with those of Mr. Warden but go 
beyond them. Because an attempt is made to communicate to the Natives the 
elements of useful knowledge in their own languages, it by no means follows that to 
those who desire them, facilities should not be afforded for learning English. But 



* See Evidence of 1832 > App. I, No. 22 [375/517]. 

f Evidence of 1832 A pp. I, No. 22 [372/516]. 

t Evidence of 1832, App. L No. 23, s. 25 [381/522]. 

§ Part of this despatch is given in the Evidence of 1832, App. I, No. 10 [339/493] ; but not the 
portion quoted. 



Note by .7. R> Golvin 177 

such knowing as suffices for the common purposes of life may without doubt J. /?• Colvin*s 
be easier taught to the Natives in their own than in a foreign language. We arc note— contd. 
persuaded (and experience on the other side of the Peninsula confirms us in tlio 
opinion) I hut a de/ire for European knowledge and for the advantages connected 
with it is the only cfTectual stimulus to the acquisition of the Knglish language,* 1 

1*2, The extent to which it wim proposed to carry the plait will be seen from the 
extract of a previous Despatch of (ho Court of April Nitlu IK2S. 11 It remain** to 
consider what may most expediently be done for the multiplication of schools. 
Your views extend to the immediate establishment of a school in each of the 
principal town* and {Judder Stations and* when these shall have produced a 
sufficient number of persons capable of teaching, in all the Cusbns and largo 
villager. We agree with yon in looking to the wide extension of the benefits of 
education as the ultimate end to be arrived at." 

IW. And Sir John Malcolm observes on the subject in para. 232 of his Minute 

of November HOilt. "Education is promulgated Mill more generally 

by lar;je schools at every principal town* that are under the immediate inspection 

of the Collector, and one of the principal nntMer* of them goes circuits throughout 

the village schools of (he district," The number of Bombay provincial schools and 

of the pupil* at them will be j-ccn from the table which I attach, taken from the 

report of the Native Education Society of that Presidency for 1838, and (he small 
i » » 

number of vernacular boat; a which all the care employed in such translations at 
Uombay has collected for the «m> of the jchooK will appear from the further tables 
annexed, also taken from the same document. It will be i^een that the list is well* 
Mipplied with elementary treatises of science but it in certainly far from rich in worka 
of general literature adopted for popular instruction* 

* * 4 * » + + 

42. A parage in thirt report 1 marl;-? the Heredity of great caution and reflect inn 
in the selection for publication of such works only in the Yenmcular languages, as 
fluty be of clearly ascertained practical utility. It is said 14 Ibvudes the Depository 
ih filled with bulky and expensive works winch have been at times printed by the 
Society at a large outlay, but which from their price being beyond the reach of most 
Native* now remain a dead weight on the Society's hands, with scarcely a hope of 
the ultimate realisation of their first cntt. Ah an instance vour Committee would 
refer to Hurry Kissowjee's ConrmntwHs on (Jlinnistn/ t a work in itself reflecting 
great credit on the translator* and a desideratum in the lists of Native publications. 
It was printed in February last at an expense to the Society of Hs. 7,000 and Urn 

t Import of thn Ttomlny iMucMlon PwMy for 



i 



178 Selections from Educational Records 

J. R. Colvin's Depository price was fixed at Rs. 17-8 per copy, the lowest at which the Society 
note — contcL could afford to sell it. Not a single copy has hitherto been disposed of except a few 

sent to regiments to complete their annual indents, and which are paid for by 
Government, and 20 copies forwarded to Mr. Wilkinson, Resident at Bhopal, by the 
Honorable J. Parish. And when it is borne in mind that many instances^ of a 
similar nature might be adduced, some of them involving even a larger outlay of 
capital, it will be evident that until the Society is, partially at least, reimbursed 
in the funds absorbed by these unproductive publications, or unless the ways and 
means of the institution are improved by more extensive contributions, its future 
operations as regards the publication of books must ba confined to the occasional 
reprinting of such works as from being used in the Society's Schools as class-books are 
sure of a ready sale:' The lesson taught by these words is of real value, for there is 
nothing more likely to bring into discredit exertions which might be of great use, 
than the waste of money and labour in attempts which end in disappointment and 
uncompensated loss. 

43. It remains only to be said on the subject of the Bombay educational In- 
stitutions that there is, as has been mentioned, a Sanscrit College at Poona, but I 
have not the means of reporting on the degree of improvement which the Super- 
intendents have succeeded in engrafting on it. The present Superintendent, 
Captain Candy, bears a high character and it is satisfactory to see that he is 
charged also with the control of the vernacular schools of the Poona Circle. The 
great advantage of European superintendence has not yet been extended to the 
Guzerat Division of Vernacular schools. i 

Madras. 

44. Less would appear to have been effected for founding an advanced system 
of the education in the Madras Territories than in the other Presidencies and my 
notice of what has been done in these territories must, most probably from the 
defective materials immediately at command, be nearly a blank. A scheme of 
District and Tuhseeldaree schools was projected by Sir Thomas Munro, but as far 
as I am informed, the measure has not been yet attended with any encouraging 
success. In a paper in my possession which was written in 1835 by Mr. James 
Prinsep when a Member of the Education Committee, he observed of the Madras 
Tuhseeldaree Schools, " They are every where pronounced to be unnecessary ; they 
are quite insignificant compared with the Native village school, the masters having 
fixed pay have little stimulus to win pupils, the children attending are of the poor- 
est class, they remain merely to acquire the rudiments of reading and writing ; in 
short the 8,000 a year expended on the zillah schools is dissipated in a transcient 
effort not capable of producing any benefit ; it might, I think, be much more 
usefully employed in preparing permanent books of instruction to be distributed as 



Note hj J. It. Calvin 



gifts or prires by tli** public officers, who should he instructed to visit and give every t7. Calvin's 
encouragement to the schonk and Colleges in tlirir Districts." note — contd. 

•15, The Honorable Court in parses. 4 to 8 of a Despatch to the Madras 
Government of i!9th September ISIUV* conveyed the following, as it seems to me, 
most ju*if remarks and excellent directions for elevating t lie scale of instruction 
within that Fresidcncv. 

t% By the measure*? originally contemplated by your Government no provi- 
sion was made for the instruction of any portion of the natives in the 
higher branches of knowledge, A further extension of the elementary 
education which already existed, and an improvement of its quality 
by the multiplication and diffusion of meful books in tho Native lang- 
uager, wn<* nil that was thru aimed at. It wan indeed proposed to 
e^tablnh at the Pnvidencv a central hchnot for the education of teachers, 
but the teachers were to be instructed only in those elementary acquire- 
ment^ which thev were afterward** to teach in the tnlmeeldareo and col- 
b-ct orate hehook. Tlie improvements in education, however* which 
ino*l effectually contribute to elevate the moral and intellectual con- 
dition of a people are thoM* which concern the education of the higher 
rla<wi of the perron* po^e^ing leisure and natural influence over the 
mind* of their countrymen, Ihj raising the standard of instruction 
among thc*c rinses gnu \rt*uld eventually produce a much greater and more 
twfirwl change w thr idea* and feeling* of (he <omtmnuty than you can 
hope to }>rtxhtce by acting directly on the more numerous class. Yon are 
moreover acquainted with our anxious deMro to have at our disposal a 
body of Natives qualified by tli*dr habits and acquirements to take a 
larger *<hnre and occupy higher situations in the civil administration 
of their Country than ban hitherto been the practice under our Indian 
Governments, The measures for Native education which has an yet 
been adopted or planned at your PreMd«*uey have had no tendency 
to produce such pen-on*. Measures have been adopted by the Supreme 
Government for placing within the reach of higher classes of Natives 
under the Presidency of Kcngul instruction in the English language 
and in European Literature and Science. These measures have been 
attended with a degree of suece^n which, considering the short timo 
during which they have been in operation, is in the highest degree satis* 
factor)' and justifies the mo.it hanguiue hopes with respect to the prac- 
ticability of spreading useful knowledge among tho Natives of India 



* VrMtnrt of IMJ> App, /, No, 21, £$ (.8 {mtfC*\*\] t 



t 



180 Selections from Educational Records 

J. R. Cohin's and diffusing among them the ideas and sentiments prevalent in civil- 

note — conclcL ized Europe. We are desirous that similar measures should be adopted 

at 3 r our Presidency. " 

46. I have not learned, but as I have said, it may probably be-only from my 
imperfect knowledge of facts, that any practical result has up to this time followed 
from the declaration of these wise and benevolent views. 



(Sd.) J. R. COLVIN, 

Private Secretary 



APPENDIX A. 

Fisher's Memoir.* 

This memoir was originally compiled in 1827 from fclie records 
at the East India House by Thomas Fisher, Searcher of the Records, 
In* 1832 he added a supplement to his memoir giving further informa- 
tion relative to native schools and to the diffusion of science among the 
natives* The memoir and supplement appear as part of appendix 
I to the Minutes of Evidence taken before the Select Committee of the 
House of Commons on the affairs of the East India Company — February 
14th to July 27th, 1832 (I Public)- This was published in 1833 and 
again in 1853. 

In this evidence, following Fisher's Memoir^ and completing 
appendix I, are given a number of original documents on education in 
India, 

The memoir deals with Bengal, Fort St. George, Bombay and 
Prince of Wales 5 Island, Singapore and Malacca, The following summary 
relates only to those portions of the memoir that deal with India proper. 

The treatment refers to individual institutions rather than to 



* The full title is " Memoir* dated Pebruary 7, 1827, compiled from the Records of the India 
Governments at the Eazl India House, in pursuance of a Minuto of the Committee of Correspondence, 
showing the extent to which Aid had been afforded by the local Governments in India towards tho 
establishment of Native Schools in that country ; And t A Supplement to tho foregoing Memoir 
dated February 23, 1832, containing a Narrative of the further proceedings of the local Governments 
in India relative to Native Schools in that country, to the date of the latest records received froTi 
India." 

Tho Memoir is printed in tho Minutes of Evidence taken before the Select Committee of the House 
of Commons on the Affairs of the East India Company, February li to Jvly 27, 1832. (I Public.) 
Appendix I* 

These Minutes were first printed by order of the Honourable Court of Directors in January 1S33 ; 
and they wore again ordered to hd printed on the 20th August 1853. In the former the Memoir and 
Supplement occupy pp# 194 to 324; and in the latter pp. 395 to 483* • References are given to both 
editions. y ^ 

( 181 ) 

2b 



182 



Appendix A 



education as a whole- In the following notes the information given by- 
Fisher both in the memoir and supplement is^ combined, and Fisher's 
order, which is documentary, has been somewhat changed* 

Analysis of Fisher's Memoir and Supplement. 

L — Bengal. 

Tlie Presidency Town. 

The Calcutta Madrassa was founded in 1781 by Warren Hastings, who_ provided 
a building at his own expense. This expenditure was afterwards charged to the 
Company. The Bengal Government also assigned lands of the value of Rs. 29,000 
a year for the support of the institution. The original intention was to promote 
the study of the Arabic and Persian languages and of Muhammadan law with a 
-view to supplying officers for the courts of justice. In 1785 the lands were assigned 
by Sanad to Muhamad Muiz-ud-din, the Superior, and to his successors. In 
1788 complaints of grave misconduct were received and the management was 
assumed by Government. In 1791 the institution was again found to be in a 
state of disorder and a new superior was appointed and the management placed 
in the hands of a Committee, and regulations were framed. In 1812 Dr. Lumsden 
reported that the institution was again in a state of inefficiency. In 1818 a similar 
report was made by the Committee who recommended the appointment of a 
European Secretary. Captain I\ Irvine was appointed with a salary of Rs* 300 
per mensem, anpl the Government at the same time fixed the revenues of the Madrassa 
at Rs. 30,000 per annum. In 1821 the Committee reported on the lack of books 
— the stock consisting only of 12 volumes—and Government agreed to an expendi- 
ture of some Rs. 6,000 for the formation of a respectable library. In the same 
year new regulations were framed. In 1822 the Committee submitted a report 
of the first annual examination, which appears to have been a success. 

In 1822 Dr. Lumsden was appointed Secretary. In the game year 
the Committee reported that " the prejudices of the preceptors opposed consider- 
able obstacles in the way of reform/' 

In 1823, Government, owing to the unsuitable location of the institution, 
ordered the construction of a new college in Hastings Place and sanctioned 
Rs. 1,40,537 for the purpose- Later an English class was established which in 
1828 consisted of 42 out of 73, the total number of students. [196, 217, 
252/396, 409, 435.]* 



The first set of numbers (196, 217, 252);refcra to pages in the 1S33 edition; the other numbers 
refer to the 1853 edition. 



* 



Fishers Memoir — Calcutta 183 

The Calcutta Hindu Sanskrit College. — In 1821 it was considered that Govern* 
merit was relieved from the pledge given in 1811 to establish colleges at Nadia and 
Tirhut. H. H. Wilson gave reasons for abandoning that design and suggested 
the foundation at the Presidency of an institution similar to that at Benares, but 
upon a larger scale. Government appointed a Committee and Lieutenant Price 
as Secretary on Rs. 300 per mensem and gave a grant of Rs. 30,000 per mensem 
and Rs. 1,20,000 for the erection of the college.* The college was opened in 1824. 
(Here follows an account of the importation of certain philosophical apparatus 
which has already been dealt with in Chapter V, page 79.) " In 1827, the acquire- 
ments of the students in the Sanskrit language and literature had reached a point 
of excellence which had never before been attained under the native system of 
education." A medical and an English class had been formed. The report of 
1829 states that Rs, 300 per mensem had been assigned for the establishment of 
a hospital in the vicinity of the college. In 1823 Rammohan Roy addressed the 
Governor-General.f Government thought the letter had been written under some 
misapprehension of their views regarding the Sanskrit College (Fisher then quotes 
the despatch of 18th February 1824 which has already been given as document 
No. 24, and the Committee of Public Instruction's defence of their policy which has 
already been given as document No, 25)4 t 212 > 217, 254/406, 410, 436.3 

Vidyalaya or Anglo-Indian College, — In 1816 some native gentleman of Calcutta 
subscribed Rs. 1,13,179 to found a seminary* It was placed under the General 
Committee as a condition of aid to the extent of Rs, 300 per mensem. Mr. Ross 
was appointed lecturer in natural philosophy. The report of the examination 
for 1824-5 conducted by Mr. Wilson appears favourable. That for 1825 gives 
a still more favourable view. The number of pupils was 200. A limited number 
of scholarships were endowed by Government* The reports of 1827 and 1828 
give the subjects of study as natural and experimental philosophy, chemistry, 
mathematics, algebra, Tytler's Elements of General History, Russell's Modern 
Europe, with Milton and Shakespeare. In 1826 the pupils numbered 196, in 1827, 
372 and in 1828, 437, of which last number 100 received gratuitous education. 
In 1829 the progress was less satisfactory than formerly and the services of the 
Revd. Dr. J. Adamson were secured. [217, 256/410, 437.] 

English College. — The Committee suggested to Government, who approved, 
the establishment of a distinct English College for the more advanced students 
from the Hindu and Muhammadan colleges to whom gratuitous instruction m 



* See tho extract from tho Resolution of 21st August 1821 quoted in chapter V, p. 79, 
■J- See Chapter V and document No, 26, p. 98. 
J See also pago 31 and document No, 14, p. 39. 

2b2 



184 



Appendix A 



literature and science by means of tlie English language should be given. The 
estimated cost was Rs. 24,000 per annum. The Court of Directors were asked to 
sanction this college and to send out two preceptors at a salary of Rs. 400 per mensem 
each* [218/410.] 

School for Native Doctors. — In 1822 the establishment of a medical school to 
consist of 20 students with allowances of Rs. 8 per mensem each, and a superin- 
tendent on R& 800 was settled. The Court did not altogether approve and expressed 
a preference for the Port St. George plan of training half-castes as dressers. The 
Court also thought the salary of the superintendent excessive. In 1825 the Medical 
Board explained their reasons for not adopting the Madras system and the superio- 
rity of their own scheme. During the prevalence of cholera in 1825 the students 
were most usefully employed. In 1826 the number of Students was increased to 
50 and the stipends to Rs. 10. The Court approved and sent out certain models. 
[270/447.] 

The Calcutta Mission College, etc. — For several of these institutions Government 
has granted the land which they occupy. [220/412.] 

The Bhoioanipore and Kidderpore Schools were established and supported by 
voluntary subscription for the instruction of Hindu lads in English. In 1829 
Europeans and Indians were associated in the management and the School Society 
made a monthly grant. The General Committee also placed at the disposal of the 
School Society Rs. 1,000 for the use of each school, considering it to be " a great 
object to establish schools of this description, which might in time serve as prepara- 
tory steps to the Hindoo College and relieve that institution of part of the duty 
of elementary tuition." They have since been united. [264/442.] 

The Old Calcutta Charity School. — The funds were augmented " from the resti- 
tution money received for pulling down the English church by the Moors at the 
capture of Calcutta in 1756 " and by a legacy left by Mr. Constantino. The old 
court house belonged to the school. The school tfas eventually united with the 
Calcutta Eree School [204/401.] 

The Calcutta Free School Society was founded in 1789. The Governor General 
in Council communicated the plan and object of the society throughout Bengal. 
The Company's surgeons wero to give gratuitous attendance and medicines were 
to be provided free by Government. 



* See the despatch of 5th September 1827, §§ 20-23. The proposal docs not seem to havo meant 
a separate college, hut separate classes. The Court approved and promised to take steps to secure 
two preceptors, (The despatch is printed in the Evidence of 1832, No. 8 [333/480], and also in the 
Madras Selections of 1855, pp. XXIX-XXXV.) 



Fis1ier*s Memoir — Calcutta — Agra « 185 



In 1800 the funds of the old and now schools were amalgamated and amounted 
to Rs. 2/72,000, In 1811 application was made to Madras "for a teacher con- 
versant with the Lancasterian plan of instruction " but without success.* In 1827 
in consequence of depreciation of Government securities the funds available became 
reduced and Government gave a grant of Rs. 800 a month. [204 3 272/401, 448.] 

The Calcutta Benevolent Institute was founded in 1810 to afford instruction in 
Bengali and English to the descendants of indigent Christians. Dr. W. Carey was 
the first secretary. In 1826 the average daily attendance was 250* Government 
then gave a grant of Rs. 13,000 and in 1827 a permanent grant of Rs. 200 per mensem 
was made. [276/45L] 

Calcutta Ladies' Schools for native females, — In 1825 a society of ladies applied 
to Government for a grant of Rs, 10,000. This was approved but vetoed by the 
Governor-General, who had " ascertained that it had been publicly avowed in the 
hearing of many native gentlemen that the object of the ladies' society was the 
propagation of the Christian religion/' The Court of Directors confirmed his deci- 
sion. [277/451.] 

Calcutta School Book Society. — This institution was founded in 1817 " with 
a view to the promotion of the moral and intellectual improvement of the natives." 
"The plan of the Society carefully excludes all means calculated to excite religious 
controversy/ 5 In 1821 the funds were low ; 126,446 copies of useful works had 
been put into circulation ; and Government sanctioned an anmial grant of Rs. 6,000. 
In 1830 the published works of the Society comprised 38 volumes. (A list of these 
works is given.) In 1828 and 1829 some 28,671 copies were circulated. The expen- 
diture within that period appears to have been Rs. 31,000- (An extract from the 
report of the Society follows.) [210, 272/405, 449,] 

The Calcutta School Society was formed in 1819 for the purpose of establishing 
native schools. In 1823 application was made to Government for aid and a grant 
of Rs. 6,000 a year was given and approved by the Directors in 1825.f The Directors 
particularly commended the Society 's education of teachers. [211, 272/406, 448.] 

The Mufassal. 

Agra College. — In 1822 the accumulated proceeds of certain property of the 
late Gangadhar Pandit amounted to nearly Rs. 1,50,000, The Committee suggested 
a college in which the Persian^ Arabic, Sanskrit and Hindi languages should be 
taught, but did not recommend the immediate introduction of the English language 



* See p. 23, The Boll and Lancastrian methods were similar ; but it was Bell that was asso- 
ciated with Madras. 

f Sco the extract from the despatch of 9th March 1825 quoted in chapter IV, p* 60i 



186 



Appendix A 



and European science. The institution of a college with an annual expenditure 
of Es. 15,240, exclusive of house-rent, was sanctioned. In 1827 the " elements 
of geography, astronomy and of mathematics, according to the European system " 
were introduced. After some discussion an English class was formed* The students 
numbered 117 in 1826 ; 210 in 1827 ; 203 in 1829, of whom 73 received stipends. 
[215, 253/408, 435.] 

Ajmer Schools. — In 1818 the Vizier determined to introduce the Lancasterian 
system of education in Bajputana. Mr. J. Carey, the son of Professor Carey, was 
selected by the Governor-General for this service. In 1822 there, were four schools 
with 100 pupils. Mr. Carey " introduced the Christian Scriptures as school books ; 
a measure which was considered objectionable/ 5 * The Company's grant up to 
1823 amounted to Es. 17,859. In 1827 the schools were reduced to one at Ajmer. 
In 1828 there were less .than 200 boys in this school. The Committee complains 
of the inadequacy of the reports. [209, 259/405, 439.] 

Allahabad School. — The native school at Allahabad was started in 1825 by 
some English residents who subscribed about Es. 30 per mensem. In 1826 there 
were 48 pupils and application for Government assistance was made. The General 
Committee supplied books to the value of Es. 1,000. In 1830 there were about 
64 students and the report was very favourable and a grant of Es. 100 per mensem 
was sanctioned, [260/440.] 

Bareilly. — In 1827 the local agents reported that there were 121 schools in 
Bareilly and also 11 persons who taught Arabic and two who taught medicine. 
In the villages around Bareilly were 22 schools and in the other parts of the district 
were 220 schools besides the college of Mahsud Ali at Badaun. Persian and arith- 
metic were taught, and in the colleges Arabic. There were schools in which the 
children of Mahajans and those intended for Patwaris were taught accounts. 
i( Hindus and Mussalmans have no scruples about reading together/' The teachers 
were paid from Es. 3 to Es. 7 a month and were given food and presents. " The 
boys begin to study at 6 years of age^ sometimes, but seldom till 20 ; in the 
colleges from 14 to 25, sometimes 30." 

The Committee suggested the establishment of a college in this district. The 
Bengal Government fully concurred and a local committee was named. " The 
proposed establishment was, upon further consideration, abandoned." [261/441.] 

Benares Sanskrit College.— This was projected by J. Duncan, the Resident at 
Benares, in 1791. The expense for the first year was limited to Es. 14,000, but 
in the following year was increased to Es. 20,000. The object of the institution 
was " the preservation and cultivation of the laws, literature and religion of the 



* See page 6. 



Fisher's Memoir — Benares — Burdwan 



187 



Hindus.** In 1811 Lord Minio mipgestcd the reform of the Benares College. " The 
principal caupc of the want of efficiency. . , .arises from the prejudices of Hindus 
against the office of professor considered an an offlcr, or even an a scrricc" u Tho 
malversation of the former native rector and the feucls among the members of tho 
college " had materially defeated tlic object of the institution. In 1815 a European 
fmperintehrlent (Mr. Galanos) was appointed. In 1820 Mr. H. H. AVilson and 
Lieutenant Fell wore desired to join the Committee for the purpose of facilitating 
tho production of a full report, Tho Committee reported a balance on hand of 
lis, 07,33:1, but very lit tie proficiency. Tn 1820 Lieu tenant 13. Fell was appointed 
superintendent. In 1821 general improvement wa«t reported. The total expendi- 
ture up to December 1821 amounted to II*. (i t 7*J,000, In 1821 Lieutenant Fell 
died* The report of 1821 \vn* not satisfactory. u The attendance of the local 
Commit too at the disputation and distribution of prizes had boon prevented by 
unexplained circumstances/' In 1827 a separate Enclfch School was sanctioned** 
[201, 217, 2o3» ) 409, 435.] 

Ifamrcs ChnrUy RrhmL — Tn 1814 Jni Narain Ghosal gave Rs, 20,000 for a 
fchooK The schtiol wan founded in 1818 and the Ucvd. D. Corric was appointed 
to the management thereof. Government pave a grant of Rs, 3,033 per annum. 
The subjects taught were English, PerMam Hindustani, Bengali, arithmetic, Govern- 
ment regulations, history, geography, astronomy, Tn 1825 Kali Sankar Ghosal, 
the f on of Jai Narain Ohoval, increased the funds by Rs. 20,000- [208/401. ] 

Thr Ithwjnlpur i^ViW \\m established in 1823 to provide instruction for 
recruit *i and children of soldiers Government provided Rs. 1,500 for t\ school 
hotiM\ Es, 2M per mensem for the sehool and Ks. IfK) per mensem for the Superin- 
tendent (Captain .K Graham). IjUt augmented to Hs. 200. In 1821 the Bishop 
of Calcutta visited the school and e\pre**ed his pleasure at the progress made. In 
182$ it \v:w proposed to discontinue the school " it was considered inexpedient 
to burthen the Education Fund with a charge of Rs, 1100 a month/* The Committee 
npp^nr to have been more jtatinftpd with the re]iort of 1829*110* [219, 2a8/411 t 438.] 

liia<pur Seminary, — fn 1822 a petition relating to a pension of Rm* o per 
mensem, which had been granted in 1793 n for the imppori of a Hindu Seminary 
at Bift.*pur/' was allowed. [289/100.] 

Bhhhum^ In 1820, a Hindu, named Sarbanuwh offered lis. 5,000 as an 
endowment for n native sehool on condition that his claim to the " oojahship" 
should be sanctioned. The offer wiw declined, [ 290/4 fiO.] 

Hunhran* — In 1818 a claim of a pension of Jtn, (MJ per annum for tlje support 
of *' a religious institution and seminary " was allowed. In 1819 a similar claim in 



* f^*! n!*o document* No** 2, H nntl 4, pp. 10-13, 



188 Appendix A 

connexion with a madrassa in the district of Burdwan was made, but no decision 
is recorded. In 1823 an endowment of Rs. 254 per annum " for a college 
at Burdwan " was reported, [284/456,] ^ 

The Cawnpore Free School was established about 1820 chiefly to afford warrant 
and non-commissioned officers instruction superior to that of the regimental schools. 

" The English, Hindu and Muhammadan lads were all educated together the 

native children flocked to the school in pursuit of the English language." In 1823 
there were 187 scholars and a grant of Rs. 400 per mensem was given. In 1830 
the report was very satisfactory ; there were then 75 scholars learning English, 
47 learning Sanskrit and 23 studying Persian and Arabic. [211, 260/406, 440.] 

The Chinsura Schools. — Certain schools^ were projected by Mr. R. May, a 
missionary, and were conducted by him on the Lancasterian plan. Mr. Watson, 
Judge of the Court of Circuit, writes " My curiosity and admiration were, I 
confess, never more excited than on the occasion of the visit I paid to the principal 
seminary at Chinsurah, under Mr. May, in which with its affiliated schools, no less 
than 800 children are instructed. 55 Between 1814 and 1815 sixteen schools had 
been established : the average attendance was 951. The estimated cost of 20 
such schools was Es. 330 per mensem. Government gave Rs. BOO per mensem 
for the purpose of establishing schools on Mr. May's plan. In 1815 the natives, 
in rivalry, opened some schools. In 1815 also Mr. May intimated " his intention 
of forming a separate school for teachers. 55 In 1816 the schools numbered 30 with 
2,000 pupils. In 1818, when Mr. May died, there were 36 schools with 3,000 pupils. 
In 1824 these schools were placed under the Instruction Committee. They appear 
to have " declined considerably." In 1829 there were 14 schools with 1,540 
pupils. [206, 258/403, 439.] 

The Ghinsnra Free School, a separate* establishment, in 1829 contained 64 
pupils. [259-439,] 

Ghittagong Madrassa. — In 1827 it was reported that Mir Hinja had bequeathed 
lands for the endowment of this Madrassa, This endowment produced Es. 1,570 
per annum and provided for the instruction of 50 students. [289/460.] 

Dacca Schools, — In 1823 a society was formed in Dacca for the support of the 
local schools. The society took under its care 6 schools which for some time had 
been supported by the Serampore Society, and which in three years had increased 
to 25 with 1,414 pupils. " Through some unaccountable cause the native sub- 
scribers withdrew their support in 1826." The General Committee held that these 
schools did not strictly fall within their jurisdiction and stated that the fund at 
their disposal w T as already entirely appropriated. Government, however, gave 
a sum of Rs. 3,000 and a supply of school books. [260/440.] 

Delhi College. — In reply to an enquiry from the General Committee Sir. J . H. 
Taylor reported on the state of education at Delhi. He noted lack of encourage- * 



Fisher's Memoir — Delhi 



189 



ment, ancient endowments in a state of neglect, poverty of the people ; " on the 
other hand, that many old colleges exist. 5 ' The establishment of a college at t)elhi 
was determined and Rs, 600 per r&ensem was appropriated from the education fund 
and Rs- 250 per mensem from an existing fund at Delhi. 

A donation of Rs. 1,70,000 was made by Nawab IsIamaid-ud-DowIa, late 
minister of the King of Oudh. In 1827 the study of astronomy and mathematics 
on European principles was introduced. In 1827 the students numbered 204 ; 
in 1828, 199 and in 1829 the number was 152. The Delhi Institution " has since 
been founded." [215, 253/408, 435.] 

Delhi Madrassa. — A grant of Rs. 7,115 from the Town Duty Fund was 
made towards the repair of the Madrassa of Ghazi-ttd-Din Khan* cc an edifice of 
great beauty and celebrity. 55 Mr. Taylor was appointed superintendent of this 
institution with a salary of Rs. 150 per mensem and a grant of Rs* 700 per 
mensem was allotted to it in addition. [216/408.] 

The Delhi Schools of Mr. Fraser. — Mr, Fraser had at different periods since 
1814 instituted schools for about 80 boys at an expense to himself of about Rs. 200 
per mensem.f He suggested that the Committee should take; over his schools 
and extend them so as to educate 400 boys at an estimated cost of Rs. 8,400 per 
annum. The Committee refused on the grounds that the charge was large compared 
with the Chinsurah schools ; and remarked that, as the peasantry of few other 
countries would bear a comparison as to their state of education with those of 
many parts of British India, the limited funds under the Committee's manage- 
ment ought to be employed in giving a liberal education to the higher classes of 
the community. [216/409.] 

Delhi Territory. — A report of 1826 states that " in the town of Panipat there 

are several ill-supported and thinly attended schools In parganah Sonepat it 

is reported by the Thanedar that there are but three schools ...... For many years 

Mr. William Fraser supported schools in the larger villages of the Parganah, but 

was forced to withdraw his aid In the town of Karnal (containing 20,000 

inhabitants) there is only one school." In 18 mosque schools were 227 pupilsr A 
report of 1827 gives for the southern division of Delhi 27 Muslim schools with 289 
pupils and 24 teachers, and 70 Hindu schools with 886 pupils and 70 teachers. 
Another report of 1827 gives details of <c 31 schools in this district and of 247 
schools in Delhi and its immediate vicinity." , The education is stated to have 
been either gratuitous, or the remuneration provided by the scholar ; " except in 



* The father of the first Nizam of Hyderabad. The Madrassa is just opposite the Ajmer Gate. 
Gee Carr Stephen Arcftmohyy and Monumental Remains of Delhi, p. 263. 
j- See Document Ifo, 5, p. 13. t 

2c 



190 Affen&ix A 

the instance of one school of seven scholars the master of which received Rs. 3 per 
month from the King." [268/445.] 

Etawah School or (?) Mainpuri College. — The magistrate of Etawah had appro* 
priated for teachers Rs. 101 out of the Town Duties, This was eventually sanc- 
tioned and the appropriation was continued until 1828 when, it appears, "no * 
progress had been made in useful learning, that the greater number of pupils was 

generally absent Under these circumstances the institution was abolished" 

[267/441.] 

Hamirpnr in Bundelkhand* — In 1828 Mr. M. Ainsle reported the establish- 
ment of a school at Hamirpur and that the Raja of Datia had asked to be allowed 
to subscribe Rs. 1,000 towards it. [281/454.] 

Hijili Madrassa. — In 1814 a claim of one rupee a day, for the support of a 
madrassa in the village of Burbah, was accepted and paid with arrears. [208/404.] 

Hill Country. — Mr. Gerard suggested the establishment of schools, but 
the Committee resolved to limit their aid to the supply of books. [216-409.] 

Hooglily Imambara. — In 1817 the existence of a small school attached to the 
Hooghly Imambara was reported. In 1824 this institution had c acquired the title 
of a madrassa ' and was in a prosperous state. The funds had by prudent manage- 
ment amounted to Rg. 16,000 per annum. The expenses were Rs. 505 per mensem. 
There were 83 students, 60 of whom were reading English. There appeared to be 
other funds available " particularly the purchase money of the Saidpur estate." 
[285/457.] 

The Jaunpore Native Free School was established in 1829. In 1830, 116 boys 
were in attendance. The school was free and was Cf conducted on the Lancasterian 
plan." [279/453.] 

Day School at Meerut— In 1819 a retired Sergeant, Robert Blewett, was 
allowed to open a day school at Meerut. [277/452.] 

The Meerut Free School was established by some European officials. In 1829 
there were 21 European, 16 Hindu, 34 Mussalman pupils. An application for 
a grant was refused by the General Committee on the grounds that all their funds 
were appropriated, and that their funds were intended for natives and not for 
Europeans. The Committee's refusal concludes by saying " our chief hope of 
" making any advance is, by forming and fostering a few effective establish- 
ments rather than by the multiplication of seminaries of an inferior description." 
[277/452.] 

Murshidabad College and School— In 1825 Government sanctioned the estab- 
lishment of an institution at Murshidabad for the education of members of the 
Nizamat family at an annual cost of Rs. 16,536. In 1826 it was reported that, 
the members of the family of the Nizam " not consenting to embrace the oppor- 
tunity of entering the institution, the Resident filled up the number of 50 students, 



Fisher s J 1cm o ir — *1 1 u rsh idahad — Nag pore 191 

of v,hom mx were to attend the college — t 1 the FchooL" The annual charge was 
IK 18.000, [219, 281/111. -151 J 

lianutrjorc School in thr riUj af Mursh\dnhul.~\\\ 1818 a clnim for IK 5 per 
moihcm for the support of a college at Murshirinhad was allowed. In 1821 this 
rhim was again considered and allowed. (285^57.] 

Propria A CoUwjcs at Nadir: and Tirhut. — The establishment of colleges at 
the-o place** \sas proposed by Lord ^Itnto in 1811.* A committee was formed 
in Nadia to carry out the plan Imt nothing was done until 1810 when the committee 
reported on the Mate of education in Xmlia, There were *1G schools with about 
?S0 Mudcnts u their ages averaging between 25 and 35 year*." Government made 
further enquiries hut no reply appears to have been received by 1821. At Tirhut 
nho « committee was apjM>inted to carry out the idea, Suggestions were made 
but nothing had been done by JS2L In that year (1821) the design of founding 
college* at Nadia and Tirhut wan finally abandoned. [205M02,] 

AWtV;,~ -{The supplement contains further infonnation about Nadia.) In 
1820 a petition for the restitution of allowances amounting to Its 4 100 per mensem 
v*ns investigated and eventually t^mctioned by the Committee of Public Instruc- 
tion. A report Mates that Nadia contains about 25 tots. The instruction is free. 
The Pandits receive funds from former grants of the liaja of Nadia and presents 
from the zumindars The students arc full grown men : the usual number in a 
tol is about 20 to 25 but there nmv he rome 50 to GO. The total number of (Undents 
y k paid to be from 5W to 0<H), fome from remote pnrts of India. The chief Mudy is 
Nyftir* '>r logic From lSlw to 1821 various claims to the continuance of allow* 
ance? were made and granted. [257 > 280,4118, 458. j 

Hinlr of Education in Naff pare. — In I82G Mr. K. Jenkins reported on education 
in the country of Xagpore, In Captain OordonV district were IKt schools with 
1 # 170 pupils: "calculating the number of children under sixteen years, beyond 
which age they never jemnin at M*hor>1, at 80,077 it would appear that public instruc- 
tion is only extended to one in eighty/* In the Wningangn district were 55 Fchools 
with -152 pupils. Jn Captain Montgomeric\s district were only 7 schools. In 
Oihatti 1 garh were 4 or 5 fchools at Kattanpur, 5 at liaipur and perhaps one in 
each parganah. The ^choolma^ter^ receive 1 fro?n two to four annas a month from 
each fcholar. Private tuition was given free to a Mill greater number of children 
by the village pandits. The teachers were paid hy tho parents at the rate of two 
or three rupees per annum or by presents, '* hut more frequently hy the tutor living 
free <>{ expense with tho parents of the children." The number of public schools 
in which payments were made by tho parents was 40 with 730 pupils, There were 

fpff -"hJ- -. - 1 j.-^- A 4*-rfT ifcj^jp-' Nh%4L ,■ > I P -Miff %. f Wft***^^ ll^p. , I^H 

♦ document No, 0, j», ID 

0 n O 
& v *d 



/ 

192 Appendix A 

51 private tutors with 323 pupils. The remuneration of private tutors varied from 
Rs, 2 per mensem in addition to their food and clothing, to Rs. 30, [282/455.] 

Rajshahi. — In 1817 a claim for Rs, 7-8 per mensem £f for performing the duty 
of a school " appears to have been disallowed. 

In 1813 a claim for Rs. 90 per annum for the support of a college, which, it was 
reported, was still efficiently maintained, was allowed. [288/459.] 

School at Surgeemarree* in Rangpur. — In 1826 Mr. D. Scott <c called the atten- 
tion of the Bengal Government to the rude and barbarous state of the inhabitants 
of the Garo mountains/ 5 A school was started with a headmaster on Rs. 200 per 
mensem, a native assistant at Rs. 50 ; stipends for 40 boys Rs. 160 ; contingencies 
Rs. 40. The first incumbent resigned and the second died in 1828. [279/453.] 

The Sylhet Madrassa was reported upon in 1827. "A few disciples/' were 
instructed and " the parties appeared to be extremel) 7 indigent/ 9 [289/459.] 

General. 

The General Committee of Public Instruction* at Calcutta. — In 1823 a note by 
Holt Mackensief led to the formation of a General Committee of Public Instruc- 
tion.! The lakh of rupees appropriated for education § was placed at the Committee's 
disposal. The schools at Chinsurah, Rajputana and Bhagalpur were placed under 
the control of the Committee. Correspondence relating to education was trans- 
ferred to the office of the Persian Secretary. || The arrears of the lakh of rupees 
for 1821-2 and 1822-3 amounting to Rs. 1,66,400 were placed at their disposal. In 
1826 the Government forwarded a report of the Committee to the Court of Directors 
(Fisher then gives an analysis of this report which consists of accounts of the various 
institutions. The essential information contained in Fisher's analysis has been 
incorporated in the preceding paragraphs.) [214, 252/408, 434.] 

Despatch of 5th September 1827.%— This despatch suggests the restriction of 
expenses, and the abolition of pensions to students. The services of the late 
Dr. Lumsden are eulogised : the arrangements proposed in the Vidyalaya 
are confirmed, particularly the two professorships. It directs attention to the 



* Kurigram south of Coocli Bihar, Singimari river is a tributary of the Brahmaputra, 
f Document No. 17, p. 57. 

X Document No. 16, p. 54. x 
§ Document No. 7, p. 22. 

}1 See documents Nos. 15 and 20, pp, 54 and 71. 

Printed in Evidence of 1832. App* I, No. 8 [333/489] and also in Madras Selections, 1855, 

p. 29. 



f 



Fisher's Memoir — Despatches to Bengal 193 

moral as well as the intellectual character of the students. The orders relating to 
employment in the law courts are confirmed, [267/445.] 

Despatch of 18th February 1829*— This relates to the Finances of the Company 
and directs economy, [267/445,] 

Despatch of 29th September ISSO.f — This despatch reviews the reports on 
institutions, which are considered highly gratifying. It reviews the several insti- 
tutions, refers to the establishment of English colleges, to English as the 
language of public business and the proposed college at Bareilly, which is approved, 
[2G7/445.] 

Despatch of 24th August 1831.% — This despatch reviews the encouraging reports 
on institutions. It approves the establishment of a hospital in connexion with 
the Calcutta Sanskrit College, The progress of the Anglo-Indian College is con- 
sidered not so satisfactory. The donation by Raja Ashmad-ud-Dowla to the 
college at Delhi is considered important aid. The encouragement given to the 
Serampore publications in English and Bengali is approved. [267/445,] 

Regulation XI of 1826. — In 1826 a Committee was formed to consider the 
proposal to make literary attainments the condition of law appointments ; and 
Regulation XI of 1826 in which certain rules were embodied was passed. The 
last of these rules allows learned natives to claim examination for a certificate at 
the annual examinations at the Madrassa and Hindu Colleges. [266/444.] 

The Press. — A press, as a means of extending knowledge by the introduction 
of printed books, involving an outlay of Rs. 13,000 with an establishment costing 
Rs, 715 per mensem was authorized. Later the establishment was transferred 
to the Baptist Mission Press, Between 1824 and 1830 it cost Rs, 98>890. Thirty- 
three works were produced and their estimated value was Rs. 58,890. (Details 
of publications are given.§) [218/411,] 

Contributions. — Contributions to the Education Fund from the Rajas Kali- 
Sankar Ghosal, Harinath Rai, and Budanath *Kai to the amounts of Rs. 92,000 
were received. 

Regimental schools. — " Provision is made by the Government for the educa- 
tion of all natives who enter the military service of the Company at this presidency 
and of their children." [290/460.] 



* Printed in Evidence of 1832. App. L, No. 10 [339/493]. 

t Printed in Evidence of 1832. App. I, No, 11 [339/4031; and Madras Sefec'ums, 1865 
p. XXXVI— XLIV. 

f Printed in Evidence of 1837. App. /•» No, 12 [346/498}. 
§ Sco also document No* 35, p. 140* 



194 Appendix A 

Fort St. George, 

Tanjorc. — From a very early period the missionaries Zeigenbald, Gericke, 
Kiernander and Swartz* had schools at their several stations of Madras, Cuddalore, 
Tan] ore, and Tricliinopoly. In 1787 the Court of Directors authorised a permanent 
grant of 250 pagodasf each for the three schools whch had been established at 
Tanjore, Ramandapuram and Shivaganga. Later on there appears to have been a 
school at each of Tanjorc and Knmbakonam costing Rs. 4,200 per annum. In 1820 
a request was received by Government for titles to certain plots of ground connected - 
with the schools and chapels in Tanjore. [220, 290/412, 460.] 

Sunday School at the Mount — In 1812 a Sunday school was established at 
St, Thomas' Mount " to afford elementary instruction on ""the Lancasterian 
plan to half caste and native children/' A grant of 300 pagodas was made, 
[220/412.] 

Cuddapah. — In 1814, Mr. Ross, the Collector of Cuddapah, suggested the , 
establishment of a school in each district. Government authorised an experiment 
at Cuddapah under Mr. Ross, Mr. Ross died soon afterwards. [221/412.] 

Palamcottah and Tmncvelhj. — In 1817 and 1818 Mr- Hough, a missionary, 
started a school at Palamcottah and another at Tinnevelly. In 1819 he asked for 
a grant of 25 pagodas a month, which was refused. The Court of Directors, however, 
remarked upon the utility of these schools and desired to be informed of the grounds 
for the refusal. The Madras Government explained that the private character 
of the schools, the uncertain continuance of Mr. Hough's superintendence and the 
probable inconvenience of the precedent had determined their decision ; but that 
the Court's wishes would be borne in mind. [221/412.] 

Committee of Public Instruction.— In 1822 Sir Thomas Munro suggested! a 
survey of the actual state of education in the various provinces under the Madras 
Government. " It is not my intention/ 5 Sir Thomas writes, " to recommend any 

interference whatever in the native schools the people should be left to manage 

their schools in their own way. All we ought to do is to facilitate the operations 
of these schools, by restoring any funds that may have been diverted from them, 
and perhaps granting additional ones," The Court of Directors gave great credit 



* See chapter I, p. 3. s 

t In Madras, down to 1818, accounts were kept in pagodas, fanams and kas (8 kas— 1 fanam, 4. 

fanaras^ 1 pagoda). In 1818 the rupee was made the standard coin and the pagoda was then reckoned 

equivalent to 3J rupees. 

% See Evidence of 1832, App. J, No. 14 [349/500], 



Fisher's Memoir — Madras 



195 



to Sir Thomas Munro for having originated the enquiry. In 182G the Madras 
Government forwarded to the Court the several returns of which the following is 
a summary. 

Fees. — The schools arc for the most part supported by fees varying from 
one anna to four rupees per mensem ; ordinarily about 4 annas and seldom 
exceeding half a rupee. 

Endowments. — Endowments bringing in some Rs. 4,212 arc reported but 
other endowments of which the value is not stated arc recorded. The Raja of 
Tanjorc supports 41 schools and 77 colleges and - the Zamorin Raja supports 
a college. Schools at the public expense (costing Rs. 1, 3(51) arc mentioned. In 
some districts it is also reported that ifi public endowments for the advance- 
ment of learning have been diverted from their original purpose or resumed/ 5 

Statistics for each district except Canara arc given. The totals are — 





Hindu. 


Muhmmnn- 
(Inn, 


Male. 


Female* 


Total, 


Scholars • 
Population • 


• 
• 

i 


175,039 


• • * 


KStJIO 
0,502,000 


0,091,503 


1SS.G50 
12,504,103 



Mr. Campbell, the Collector of Bcllary, gives details (Part of his report is 
given above as document No. 18), On these reports Sir Thomas Munro recorded 
a minute dated the 10th March 1826, (Fisher gives an abstract of this minute, 
which, however, occurs above as document No. 21, p. 73.) 

The minute of Sir Thomas Munro concludes by recommending the appoint- 
ment of a, Committee of Public Instruction. With very slight modification the 
Council concurred in the President's suggestions. The following were appointed 
members of the Committee : — IL S. Graeme, W. Oliver, John Stokes, and A, 
Campbell. 

The object of the Committee is stated to be " the general improvement of 
education," The members arc instructed " to acquaint themselves fully with its * 
actual state, and to consider and report to Government from time to time the results 
of their enquiries and deliberations respecting the best means of improving it." 
A disbursement of Rs. 45,000 per annum is authorised. 

In 1826 the Committee issued a circular letter, dated the 24th June, to the 
several officers in the interior. (This letter is given in full.) It states that " no 
measures can be pursued, whatever other advantages they may offer, which are 



Appendix A 

of the electorate? S ? ° v" 1 "™ 1 and 15 sub °^natc schools for each 
fonn a b^^^^ " «* " f » step, to 

college is „ ow established attne Presidenet "3° > ' " f" 0 ' " 

candidates from each r,m^J T ilcsiaenc y . and it is requested that two 

" who will ^"17™ r * S ° T d ^ dire ° ted t0 4 ° Madras, 

Selves JTht £ £ tSW* ^ ^ 

colIcctorateT^ ^ ^ ° f the ™ al *"» * ~* 

schools should be onentn S f ^ ^ b ° apP ° inted on Es - 9 P« »»»"»• Th<= 

posed to send inl the ^ ^ ^ ^ C ° mD ^ also P™- 

and PersiaTa a few nf * ' ^ J""*"" o£Sansk * ^abic, Tamil or Telugu 

college. \ principal towns, some of the law students at the 

thes^Ltceonhtr 6 !, ^ ^ InStrUCtiMl *" **« 
dates for theSion !f u T In 1827 ifc was re P° rted that 10 candi- 

encouragin. coUeetoi ,?<> were being trained " with the.most 

"sled wlSin ^ Cid! °r eiglt tahsiIdary sch °° ,s had ^ 

" his moS' , Zl B0a , rd fixcd & ° ra *° of fees to be levied by a master so that 

he XeTeive t^'S"*"** 8 may be00me d ° ubl « 

«m i eteive irom Government. 

series of w 2 ork!t theTf " P ~ on to P rint at tbe College press a 

Iished at WaW f ° f tKat part of India - 1,1 «»» a school was estab- 

the Eaja TlrZ *" 1 n " , ™*«? * the English and native languages for which 

«— - irjfts sr am,um - 11,6 s G — 4 

branch of that .r^^X^^'^f' 4 (It " ^ " * 

teach^afoLw ammadan Udary teacher in addit ™ to the three Hindu 
school^™ Tn?4 aPPr T dl , aS ak0 WaS tle -tahlishment of a tahsildarv 
PauMdchm,, <\<- a school - r o on i was erected at Calicut and another at 

hQL tottT? °^ 6 °- 4 - 7 ' a 'i d 3D inStruotOT ™ s W'"^ 
dary school at 7-V ; , a ° her W ' as a PP r oved for Kumbahonam and a tahsil- 
y scnool at Tnchnopohj was approved. [296/464 1 

the 2"! •~ Pr °" 5i0n iS made by Government for the education of 
^ natives in military servu* and their children. [297/465 ] 



Fisher's Memoir — Bombay 197 

Bombay. 

In 1752 two additional chaplains were appointed for Tellechcry and Anjengo 
" that the rising generation might be instructed in the Protestant religion/' The 
Court also recommended to the Bombay Government " the setting up and estab- 
lishing of charity schools/' [229/417.] 

Mrs. Boyd's Charity.— In 1767 Mrs. Eleanor Boyd left Rs. G 5 000 to the charity 
school at Bombay,, which had, since 1918, been supported by voluntary subscrip- 
tions. The funds of this institution, apart from Mrs. Boyd's legacy, appear to 
have amounted fo I?s. 4G,1I5 in 1821, Later Mrsf Boyd's legacy is referred to 
as being ' appropriated as an endowment to the Bombay Education Society/ 
[220, 207/418, 4 05.] 

Engineer Institution at Bombay. — The Engineer Institution is maintained by 
Government. In 1824 there wcrq*3G native students and 14 lads of European 
descent* The Superintendent was Captain Jcrvis. Tn 1826 the Court of Directors 
observed that ibis institution had been established without their authority* In 
182G there were SO students and the report appears to have given ' high satisfaction ' 
to Government, Tn 1820 the Court sanctioned the increase to Rs. 800 per mensem 
of Captain Jen-is' pay- [215, 300/430, 473.] 

Captain Sutherland's plan. — In 1825 Captain Sutherland formulated a plan 
for educating youths for the revenue service which was approved (no details arc 
given), and 21 boys were placed under Captain Jcrvis and a sum of Bs. 4:00 per 
mensem was allotted — Bs, 200 for a superintendent and Bs, 200 for 25 stipends 
at Bs. 8 each. 

Medical School, Bombay. — Tn 1825 a scheme for an institution for the instruc- 
tion of natives in medicine was formulated. This institution was to be similar to 
that at Calcutta. The pay of the principal was Bs. 500 per mensem and bis staff 
consisted of three munshis each on Rs. 40 per mensem and two peons *' to assist 
in reading and translating in the different languages/' The work at first appears 
to have consisted principally of translating the pharmacopoeia, a book on anatomy 
and physiology, and other medical works. [ 311/474.] 

Elphinslonc Professorships. — In 1827, on the retirement of Mr, Elphinstonc, 
a sum of Bs, 1,20,000 was subscribed as an endowment for " three professors of 

the English language and European arts and sciences, to be designated 

the Elpbinstonc Professorships/' In 1830 the subscriptions amounted to 
Us, 2,15,100 and the Court of Directors authorised the grant of an equal amount 
cither as a sum of money or an annual allowance. The final proposal to wliich 
this sanction appears to apply was to institute two professorships — one of 
" mathematics, astronomy and all branches of natural philosophy at Es. 800 per 
oipnsem, who might have chargo of tho observatory and resido rent free in the 

2p 



198 ^ Appendix A 

house which was erected at Bombay for the astronomer ; and only one other 
professor or teacher on a salary of Rs. 600 per mensem who would be expected to ^ 
possess a complete knowledge of the practical application of the sciences of 
architecture, hydraulics, mechanics, etc., etc/ 5 [303/469.] 

Sir Edivard West Scholarships. — In 1828 a sum of Us. 11,400 was subscribed 
as an endowment for certain scholarships and prizes to be called ' Sir Edward West 
scholarships and prizes/ [304/469.] 

The Hindu College at Poona was established in 1821 by Government at an 
annual cost of Rs. 15,250. The college was designed to contain 100 students and_ 
the subjects to be taught were divinity, medicine, metaphysics,- mathematics and 
astronomy, law, ' logic, belles-lettres, rhetoric and grammar/ Part of Dr. J 
Taylor's library appears to have been handed over to the college. In 1825 arrange- 
ments were made for the teaching of English. In 1828 an application for permis- 
sion to give money prizes caused some discussion in the Bombay Council. Even- 
tually Rs. 1,520 was distributed. [247, 308/431, 472.] 

The Dhuksna. — " The Honourable Mountstuart Elphinstone, in his Report 
on the territories conquered from the Peishwa, submitted to the Governor-General 
in Council in 1819, stated, that in the Peishwa's time, an annual distribution 
of charity, called the Dhuksna, took place, which cost five lakhs of rupees ; that 
* the original plan was to give prizes to learned Brahmins, but that as a handsome 
sum was given to every claimant, however ignorant, to pay his expenses, the insti- 
tution degenerated into a mere giving of alms.' The' practice was therefore 
abolished, the sum of five lakhs of rupees being considered c too enormous to waste 
but the abolition appearing to be extremely unpopular, Mr. Elphinstone obtained 
the sanction of the Bengal Government to the appropriation of a sum not exceeding 
two lakhs of rupees to this object, and re-established that which appeared to have 
been the original Dhuksna, amounting to Rs. 50,000, and proposed that it should 
be still kept up but that c most of the prizes, instead of being conferred on profi- 
cients in Hindoo divinity, should be allotted to those who were most skilled in 
the more useful branches of learning, law, mathematics, etc, and that a certain 
number of professors might be appointed to teach* those sciences/ The arrange- 
ment and appropriation of the Dhuksna was committed to Mr. Chaplin, the com- 
missioner in the Deccan." [247/431.] 

The Native School Society of Southern Eonl-an was formed' in 1823. In 1824 a 
* grant of Rs. 500 per annum was given by Government. The report of 1824 shows 
4 schools with 6 teachers and 238 pupils. The average cost per pupil in the Mahratta 
schools is Rs. 3 ; in the English school it is Rs. 25. In the English school half the 
cost is borne by the pupils. " Further proceedings of the society have been held 
in correspondence with the Native Education Society." [246, 309/430, 473.]^ 



Fisher's Memoir — Bomhay 



199 



General. 

Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor within the Government of 
Bombay. — This Society was formed in 1825 with donations amounting to some 
Bs. 40,000- The Court of Directors authorized a grant of Ks. 500 per mensem. 
The schools established, which were conducted on Bell's system, were the Central 
School, Bombay, with 180 scholars, four native schools at Bombay with 217 
f scholars ; one at Surat with 25 ; one at> Tamrah with 29 ; one at Broach with 30 
scholars. In 1825 the number of scholars had decreased, [229/418.] 

Native Softool Book and School Society. — This Society was formed in 1823 for 
the purpose of promoting education among the natives. The Society adheres 
" to the principles and rules on which education is conducted by the natives them- 
selves ; and in consonance with those principles, the society adopted the Lancas- 
terian plan." In 1823 a grant of Rs. 1,060 per mensem was sanctioned by Govern* 
ment who also gave the Society a lithographic press. In 1824-5 some Us. 3,500 
was subscribed by native gentlemen for buildings. Dr, John Taylor's valuable 
library was handed over to the Society by Government. 

In 1824 a speSal Committee of the Society was appointed to examine the 
system of education prevailing among the natives. This Committee reported 
that the chief wants were books, 'an easy and efficacious method of imparting 
instruction/ teachers, funds. They recommended a series of publications, and 
after a comparison with c the Malabar system of tuition, ' the adoption of the 
plans of Lancaster and Bell, and the training of teachers at Bombay, 

Considerable discussion among the members of Council followed and Mr. 
Warden wrote a minute on the Committee's recommendations. The collectors 
were called upon for information and returns from seven districts were recorded 
in 1825. 



District. 


Villages. 


Villages 

with 
schools. 


Schools. 


Scholars. 


Teachers' fees, etc. 


Ahmcdabad 


928 


49 


84* 


2.CG1 


Occasional fees and food. 


Southern Konkan 


2,240 


C5 


8C 


1,500 


About lis. 4 por mensem and 
food. 


Kaira District . 
Kaira Sadder Station 


C79 
# p . 


... 
. « * 


139 
2 


230 


} Food and money presents on 
£ special occasions, e.g., Ks. 5 
j when the pupil leaves. 


Northern Konkan 


*#• 


• • * 


9 


780 


Various alJowano from 
parents. 



21 in Ahmodabad and 03 in villages 



2d2 



200 



Appendix A 



District, 


Villages. 


Villagos 

with 
schools. 


Schools. 


Scholars. 


Toacliors' fees, otc. 


Surat Zillah 


G55 


21 to each 
100 vil- 
lages. 


139 


3,000 


Pood, cash, land; 


Surat Town 


68 and 74 
o t h e r 
teachers 


3.04G 


■ * • 


• • * 


About Rs. CO per annum in 
grain and money. 


Broach Zillah . 


396 


* * * 


98 


• * ■ 


Fixed allowances, or grain 
and money at certain stages 
of proficiency. 


Broach Town , 


• • • 




16 


373 


Grain, small monthlv fee and 
proficiency fees. 


Kandesh 
Poona City 


2,738 

* ** 


G8 

* • * 


189 
222 


2,022 
• * ■ 


The average for each school 
is not more than Rs. 36 
per annum. 


Poona District 


880 


* • • 


149 


2,445 


Rs. 3 to 0 per annum for 
eacli scholar* 


Ahmadnagar . 


6,635 


-* • • • 


1G1 


... 


Average Rs, 3 per mensem for 
each master. 


Dharwar 


1,441 




150 


2,351 


Average pay about Rs, 4 j>or 
mensem for each master- 



The returns are accompanied by a report from Mr. Secretary Farish,* who 
suggests the expediency of adopting the native method of payment, including 
the daily present of grain, and advocates the training of teachers as the first step. 
(Details of schemes by Major Robertson, Mr. Williams and Lieutenant Jervis 
are given.) 

The Government in a communication to the Directors state " that education 
is in a low state throughout the country ; that the instruction imparted in schools 
expends, with very limited exceptions, only to such an elementary acquaintance 
with writing and arithmetic as is absolutely necessary for the business of a shop- 
keeper or tullatee ; that but a small proportion of the people acquire even this 
knowledge ; and that the aid of Government, in providing or assisting in the 
remuneration of school masters, is essential to any advancement of learning. 3 * 
[231-245/419-430.] 



* See chapter IV above, p 49. 



Fisher's Memoir— Bombay 201 * 

Miscellaneous. 

American Missionaries. — In 182(5 certain plots of gound were granted to the 
American missionaries. [31 5/J 77, ] 

Regimental schools. — In 182(5 an increase in the pay of schoolmasters from 
Rs. 12 to I?s. 15 per mensem vns sanctioned. [315/477.] 

Lithography. — Between 1822 and 1830 a number of lithographic presses were 
sent out to Bombay and in 1827 the Native School Book and School Society was 
directed to use the Government lithographic press * on all occasions when litho- 
graphy might be required/ [315/47(1,] 

Despatches. 

Despatch of 16th April JS2&*. — This refers to the reports of the collectors and 
judges, [316/477.] 

Despatch of JSfh February /<S2#f. — Approves the establishment of training 
school at Bombay ; asks for reports from districts ; expresses satisfaction regard- 
ing the Engineering Institution; approves Mr. Elphinstone's views; directs a 
reconsideration of the proposal to appoint superintendents (Inspectors) ; requires 
further information relative to Captain Sutherland's plan. [31G/477.] 

Despatch of 29th September 1S$0%. — Approves generally proposals regarding 
the Engineering Institution, the medical school, the Elphinstone Professorships, 
the Poona college and native teachers. [31G/477.] 

— -i-"- — If ■■ -_r-L i i . — i _ ■ — — — - - - - -- - L - - - - - - - — -- 

• Printed in Eridener of 1832, App. I, No. 28 [388/527], 
t Printed in Kritlcntc of 1832, A pp. /, No. .TO [39l/.',20]. 
t Printed in A'tvfcnee of 1832, App. I, No. 34 [408/."»41]. 



* 



APPENDIX B. 

List of Documents quoted in this Volume, in Chronological 



Order. 


Description of documents. 


1 

References to previous publication* 


Reference 
to present 
volume. 

* 






Page. 


Minute by Warren Hastings, dated the 
17th April 1781. 


Bengal Past and Present, viii, 1914, p. 
105 f. 


7 


Despatch to Madras dated 16th February 
1787. 




3 


Letter, dated 1st January 1792 from J. 
Duncan, Esq*, Resident at Benares, to 
the Governor-General. 


(1) Bengal Past and Present, viii, 1914, 

pp. 130-133. 

(2) SketcJi of the rise and progress of the 

Benares Patshalla or Sanskrit Col- 
lege, by G. Nioholls. 


10 


Letter, dated 13th January 1792, from the 
Governor in Council to the Resident at 
Benares, 


(1) Bengal Past and Present, viii, 1914, 

pp. 130-133. 

(2) Sketch of the Rise and Progress of the 

Benares Patshala or Sanskrit Col- 
lege, by G. Nicholls. 


12 


vjuhci vuuoiia on wie state or society 
among the Asiatic subjects of Great 
Britain, etc., by^C. Grant, dated 16th 
August 1797. 


irxinteci in tne Jiepon jrom me oeieci 
Committee of the House of Commons on 
the affairs of the East India Company, 
IGth August 1832, App. I, pp. 82-87. 


OX 


Minute, dated 1st January 1804, by Mr. 
Brooke (on the Sanskrit College, Benares). 


Sketch of the Rise and Progress of the , 
Benares Patshala of Sanskrit College, 
etc, by G. Nicholas, pp. 9-13. 


33 


Despatch, dated 7th September 1808, to 
Bengal. (On the treatment of Missionary 
enterprise,) 


J. W. Kaye. Christianity in India : 
an historical narrative, p. 615 f. 


4 


Minute by Lord Minto, dated Gth March 
1811. 


(1) Evidence of 1832, App. I, No. 3 [325/ 

484]. 

(2) Calcutta Review, Hi, 1845, p. 255 f . 


19 



( 202 ) 



List of documents 203 

> 

Lkt or 1)(htmi:nts <?roTi:» in this Yolumk, in Chronological 

Oitm:it — roiiA/. 



or r*> <tr K 



to pre*rnt 
vol time 



im*> i 

J!-r.»tr. 0 - l»-M<r IMS. M * 



J^v.\ 0 ^t^*l J oh 1«2.\ fr«n iKr 



i 



/V ;**7,;* 3*/rn* J.SJO, No. 2 (Vnl. T> ( 
Jon* 1*0*, !•(, I). 



NV*^ f i:m Auh Is21. *•> Mr Ht*M j 

M<i 

ISr* »i!if-» p «fif ITtli *lolj 1^2*1. 



<!* f 'vJ 31*'* *M> ujii^ntirr 



l*iS Ati^u*', J*i,W from Mr. j 



* 

pn^r M W # r>V , pp 13 It- 
Ih2!>, P< 0 



(I) tU^tnrt **f iSU\ Aptt. I, No. 15 



1 



Lr f **T, tUu*\ *"<th **vp!rmW lfc2X frmn j 
\V 4 lV*»*f, l«» t*.*» < Mr! HorrrtAry* Tort ! 

i 

A^«r«r* **f T-il^tjft^ Mmlfji*-i f 3r*I | 

i 

Ofl*TAj r/»m mitt*'" 



WW. Junr Nn 2 (Vnl. ft, ] 

Junn imp, *) 



/W. p^y*. */nr»/ /^2P P N(K K'l 



tt •» *t 



i'^A pnwp ,> t /A2f/ t No 2 (Vol. ;> r 



! 



Pack, 



21 



r, 



r.t> 



in 



3« 



4 



* 



204 Appendix B 

List of Documents quoted in this Volume, in Chronological 

Order — contd. 



Description of documents. 

« ■ „ 


References to previous publication 

or record. 

* 


Reference 
to present 
volume. 






Page. 


Letter, dated 29th November 1 823, 
from the General Committor to Govern- 
ment. 


Vol progs. 5 Juno 1829, No. S3 . 

r 


9S 


Address, dntcd 11th December 1823, from 
Raja Rnmmohan Roy. 


(1) G- Trevelyan. Education of the 
people of India f pp. G5-/1. 






(2) C. JL Cameron. An Address to Par. 
liament on the duties of Great Britain 
in India, etc.. pp. 83-87. 




Minute, dated 13th December 1823, by 
Mount-Stuart Elplrinstono, 


Evidence of 1832, App, I, No, 22[3G5/5U], 




Resolution of 17th January 1824 (on the 
allotment of funds). 


Pol. proga, 5 June 1829, No. 83 . 


71 


Despatch to Bengal, dated I8th February 
1824, 


Evidence of 1832, App. I, No. G [331/488J. 


01, 149 


Letter, dated 18th August 1824, from the 
General Committeo to the Governor- 
General* 


Sixth Report on Indian Territories, p. 18f, 
* 


03 


Letter, dated 15th October 1824, from 
tho General Committeo to Govern- 
ment, 


Pol. progs. 5 Juno 1820, No* 83 . 


78 


Despatch, dated 9th March 1825, to 
Bengal* 


Evidence of 1832, App. I* No. 7 [332/488]. 


50 


Minute, dated 10th March 182G, by Sir T. 
Munro. 


(1) Evidence of 1S32. App* I, No. 18 
[358/500]. 


73 




(2) Madras Selections, ii, 1855, p. *x* 




Despatch to Bengal, dated 5th September 
1827. 


Evtdeitce of 1832, App. 1, No. b jJd.yioJ]. 


JV> i no 


Despatch to Madras, dated 16th April 
1828. 1 


(1) Evidence of 1S32, App. I, No. 19 

[360/538]. 

(2) Madras Sekttioris, ii, 1855, XXIIL 


51 


Despatch to Bombay, dated 10th April 
1828, 


Evidence of 1832, App. I, No. 28 [388/527]. 


201 


Minute of 1828 bv Sir J, Malcolm . 


Evidence of 1832, App. I, No. 26[385/525]* 


144 




t 





r 



List 0/ documents 205 



List op Documents quoted in this Volume, in Chiionologioal 

Order — contd. 



Description of documents. 

1 

1 


References to previous publication 

or record* 


to present 
volumo. 






Pacje. 


Despatch to Hombav, dated idth February 
1820, 


Evidence of IS32, App. I, No. 30, [391/ 
529]. 


170, 201 


Despatch to Benptl, tinted 29th September 

mo. 


(1) Evidence of m2, App. I, No, 11 

[330/193]. 

(2) Mad rat Selections i\ > 1855, p. xxvi. 


51, 171, 193 


JJC*<paicu 10 *uauras, uaieu -uiu oepicmijcr 
1830. 


rmV/«*»ri*/iMcio Aim t w n oi rnni/rtim 

Ij I iuCllCC OJ ioo^t **PP» *f AiO. J I J JU4/0iUJ, 


10b, 1 iO 


Despatch to Bombay, dated 291 b September 

mo. 


Evidence of 1S32, App. I, No. 34 
[40S/5H]. 


201 


Minute, dated 30th November 1830, by Sir 
J. Malcolm. 


Evidence of 1835, App. I, No. 35 
(411/013], 


177 


An account ot expenditure on education 
from 18 IH to 1830, 


Evidence of JS32, App. I, No. 2 [325/4 83 J 


49 


Despatch to Urngal, unlcu Jltli August 
183!. 


J * via f tier oj Joal;, App. X, -Wo 1" 


193 


l^xfract from jeeport ot reject mhu* 
mittce of the Hou*e of Commons on 
tbo affairs of the Ka*it India Company, 
lOtli August 1832. 


i nnicu ny oruor oi me it on wo ooun oi 
Directors, January 1833, pp. 28-30. 




Minute, dated Dili July 1831, by H. T. 
Priiwp. 


Public pro^ 7 March 1835, No. 10 (Vol. 
Feb. Mar. 1835). 


103 


Letter?, dated the 21st and 22nd January 
1835, from the General Committee of 
Public Instruction to Government. 


Public propw. 7 March, 1835, No. 7 


104. 105 


Report, dated ,'tlflt January 1835, on (he 
Sa rodent College, Calcutta. 


t 


39 


Minute by tbo Ilon'blo T. 11, Macaulny, 
dated tbo 2nd February 1835. 


(1) C. 11- CAMrnox, An address /o JV- 

Unmnit, etc., 7552, pp. Gt-80, 

(2) A. J* Atuiuthkot. Selections from 

the Record n of the Madras Goemt- 
vxent t etc., ii, 185G, pp. Ixxivdxxxiii, 

(3) ir. Woonnow. Macanlai/s Minutes 

on Education in India t etc., JSG2. 


107 



2 E 



J 



206 



Appendix B 



List op Documents quoted in this Volume, in Chronological 

Order — concld. 



Description of documents. 


References to previous publication 

or record. 


Reference to 
present 
volume* 




some distinguished Anglo-Indians 
(Second »Sorie*?) t pp. 170-18 U 


Pa an. 




(5) S, Sattiiianadhan, History of 
Education in Madras, pp. bx. 




• 

* 

lNuio ijy xi* x* xnnscp, dated i*jiiix i oi>* 
ruary 1835, with marginal notes by 
Macaulay, 


t(\\ n O Tnrrrrviv 7\i/V /t«/7 Teller* 
VJT# w ■ J. itr.\ J.Lj j. An< JjlJC Uriel Jjtttt rfi 

of Lord Macaulay, pp. 290-202 (in 
part only). 


117 
1 1 i 


xicsoiuuon oy lioru lsontmcic, uatcu t no tin 
March 1835. 

* 


✓ 

(ij AuuUTnNOT s Madras ociccitons, 
ii t 1855, pp. lxxxiii-lxxxiw 


1 9ft 


Extracts from tho diary of II. T. Prinsep 


liamcnt, pp. 81-82, 


132 


Propositions adopted by tho General 
Committee on tho 11th April 1835. 


Public progs, a June 1835, No. 6 


142 


Letter, dated tho 20th April 1835, from the 
General Committee of Public Instruo- 
tion. 


•> if tt • 


139 


Minute, dated 20th May 1835, by H.' T. 
Prinsop. 


m „ No. 8 


134 


Petition of students of Sanskrit College, 
Calcutta, dated 9th Autrust 1830. 


Public proga. 24 Aug. 1830, No. 18 


145 


Minuto by Lord Auckland, dated tho 
24th August 1830. 


No 20 5» 


147 

* 


Note, dated 24th November 1830, by 
J. R» Colvin. * 


Report of the Genoral Committee, 1S39- 
40, pp. xliii-civ. 


170 

i 


Minute by Lord Auckland, dated 24 th 
November 1839. 


(1) A, Durr. Letters addressed to Lord 

Auckland on (he subject of Native 
Education, pp. xi-xxviii. 

(2) Report of tho Genoral Committee, 

li*39-40, pp. i-xlii. 


147 


Minute, dated 12th December 1839, by 
Lord Elphinstono. 


Madras Selections, ii, 1855, exxii. 


52 



* 

t 



Leadinglevents in India and Europe 



207 



6 
o 
I* 



o 

G 

c 
W 



n 
o 
u 

CL 
O 



> 
t-t 

o 
o 
c 

m 



I- 



CO 



CO 



00 



CO 



00 



CO 



CO 

It- 



00 



00 



to 



d 

o 

X g 



» c d 

* Ci 

j- o ^ 
o r3 hh 

^♦d 5 - 

« o 
^ d , > 




o 
o 

c 

o 
^3 



O 

to 

t-t 

o 

fe 



^ a 

W 

Ci 



d a 
c3 P-l 



a 



o 
o 



.b P. 
p, o 

Ti 

d 



ti 



to 

S c 

♦ .CO o 

^ c d 

o 



o 



ci 
o 

c* 

o 

to o 



r- 

a 

o 

tn 
P 

o 



p 



E 

O 



d 

o 

d 

oW 



S- 8 

0D « o 

o ° 

to ►* 1 

m ^ 
4J © C3 

S 3 c 

o o 



tn 



5 o 



O 



^ i- _ 



i— ^ M 



s 

o 

o 

o 
O 



o 

CO 

.£3 o 



o 



o 



S 



s 

o 
o 

p-l 



0 



c 



c3 G 



ci 



c 

ci 

it: 
o 



CD 

- o G 

-S § 8 

C3 

o 



e3 > 

B 
o 

o ^ 



c; o 



to 

tin* 

■S « 

O ^ 

C 



C3 

* "H 



to 

o S 



c3 
O c3 



i: c 



c S 
c o 

g o 



u 

J? 
ci 



ci 



ci 

p- ?. y ^ 



g 

o 



3 S 
&B 



B 

ci 

■ 1-4 

CO 

o 



CO 



«1 



C3 2-1 



% 

• #-4 

to 
to 

CD 
.S 

ci 

w 

d 

CO «3J 

p- ci 



o 

b 

ci 



d 

6 to 

a ^ 

ci co 

cj ei 




rt' - 
o d 

d rt 
u O 

>^ 

o 
O 



ci 
o 



c 

E 



o 

It* 



I- 



CO 
I— 



o 

CO 



CO 



00 



CO 

00 



CO 



o 

w 



1^ 

CO 



CO 

(J 
a 
o 

O 



o 

CO 



oo 



2e2 



208 



CO 
CO 



o o 



Cv 



1^ 



00 



1^ 



o 

CO 



d 
c 



o 

> I 

it 

d 

a 
S 

H 
Eh 



•d wr 

d 

o 



0) 



d 

o 

^> 

•5 2 

o 



d 

o 

tn 
d 

o 
o 

"cj o 



o 

* £ c 

tft CJ tH 

o ^ o 

H C O 

y js 

O 



tn * 

d 

~ c 



* 

a 

p3 *d ^ 



, M o 
o > 

I 03 



~ C 

d t- 



g c 

c ci 



> d 

M ° 

« 2 

s ^ 

o 

*3 



a ^ 

c 

o g 
o 

s 

C <D 

o ^ 
^ o c 

2 g o 



X * o 
9 .Si M 



% ... 

.2 s 

a $ 



CO 



o ^ 



d « 

o a* 

-a ^ 

O 



rr 



^ o 
o 



or; 



d c 



C O O pL( 
•** o 



o 
o 
c 



c5M 



c 

o 

E 



F ° 

^ s 

O 

• 

X = - 



o d 



o 

d 
o 



O ^3 

d rt 



ci 
o 



Ij. 

o g.2 

cf? 

S So 



- e d 

.£ » 
^= W 

§ - O 
j-> d 

c r ^ 

^ o ^ 

2 ss * 

rd x ca 

^ CT O W rr, ^ 

2 -St: -2 ■? y^fe 

Co g S ° 

OS? 



- - £h 



c P - c 



o 

cj -* "tV- 

o w 



i-3 



d 

o 



^ d 




o 
o 

o 
CO 



o 



d3 

o 



p 





















* 






* 


an 




o 


GO 
m 




o 


d 


*S 


Benar 


o 


o 






o 



* 



43 



d 

d4 

o 
o 
u 



* 



-4^1 

S3 

o 

o 



o 
o 



o 

O 



d * 

O d 

C o 
P3 



c ° 

I s 

d o 

5 

O 



o 



o 
d 
d 

d 

d To 

£ d 

o 



PS 

c 

TO 

o 



* 

# 



CO 
CO 



o o 

co Ci 



1- 



o 

I"* 



1^ 



CD 



I— 

o 



t4 

c3 

s 

d 
o 
o 

0Q 



o 

O 

CO 

W 



CO 

o 



d 

ci 

d 
ci 



O 

t-r 
O 



£ g 
R 



■ 

o 



O 



a 



~ il^,2 

* VJ M c 

go 

§ 3 

O ^ 



G 2 « 



o 

to 

o 

'o 



c3 



d 

o 

o ° 

fx* 



d 



d c 
o 

d o 

p 

« d 
d 



55 



* 



o 

CO 



Leading events in India and Europe 



20$ 



O 

CO 



CI 

o 
co 



a? 



o 

as 



o 

CO 



o 



o 

CO 



o 

CO 



o o 

CO CO 00 



oo 



o » » 



C C 4> 



£ eg 



la 



c 



^ c- 2 



3 e 



* u 

S3 u 
C 



P = O 

y c 

>~ C r: 

c.-- o 

S a 

n h 

o o ^ 



U 

O 



a. 

^* 

c 

IT; 



<- 

c 
c 
o 



c 

^ -*« 



o 

O 



C C Cj 



o 5 



43 



O 



gt: 



£ c 



— « g 

J3 ^ o 



-5 « 



- — 



t ^ 



4 

c 

o 



3 . 



• x 

.f '"I Cj 



o 

*^*> * 

tl c « 

.£ c *7 

o o ^ 



^ go 



a? c 

Si 5= o 

^ C 
u ^ 

^ ej 

c V c 



i? 

o 
c 



t: c 

5 s c 



c 



o c 2 
~ o c 



4 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 
c 

g o 



r3 



> u £ 
>v ^ C 



o 

- e 

7^ ° 

r i • « 

o 



E 

_ o 



3 Er 1 



o 



£ S 



E ¥ 



o 



o Ci 



4 
• 



O »- 



to 



^ ^ d t 



^3 O 

c 



* 



o ^ 



c C( o 



o 

-d"5 
c 

Hi^ "** 

P5 



c 



* 



K 

Eri 



cs 

Cj 

o 
o 



o 
c 



s 

s 

n 
*- E 

•S E 



Pi 



* 



CI* 



o 

H 



* 



• 

0 



SI 

3 



o 



s 



o 



o 

C/J 



to 
o 

CO 



o 

CO 



o 

CO 



CO 

o 

CO 



O O i— * 

O ^* 

CO CO CO 



CI 
CO 



ft 



Appendix 0 



rt 
o 



o 
■J-> 

o 



*g 

g 

To 
g 



O 

to 
o 



CO 



00 



00 



o 

CO 



00 



CO 
CO 



CO 



o 

CI 

00 



CM 
oo 



CO 
1-1 

ft ft 

. o 

a £ 

^ el « 

CJ O 

2 o g 
A ft_h 

< 



d.SS 

g 



if 

O -+-» 

So 



CJ 



CO 

to 



eft 

* 

o 



o 
o 



o 
g 



to 
#- 

g p 
g%a 

*g o 
t/: 



c to 
g 

J2tts 



o tf) s 

- o ,g g 

n to o 

g — w 

to g O 

Jo- 

SHE." 



o • 



° o 



I-r 

fl- 



at 



O 



S C 



o 
c 
o 



O « 
C3 S 

s o o 



«f * o 
g ^* 

M g 

o ; f 

tc g 

O i„, s 

sr. .g 



g rr *• 

5 O 



JS tot 



3 £ * o 
o » ^ 

*~IP » ^ 



^ o 

O J3 

c 

CD 

^ "g 

W g 
Cg 

m 

s .i . 

cc.-g g 

^ .2 *rt 

g g ft 



g g to 

O g 
O CJ 

111 ft«-* 
^ o o 



g 



o o 



ft ° 
^ o 



(0 



O 








c3 




a 


S 


g 


CJ 


o 


iH 


CD 




2 


is 




^> 


o 




e 


o 




Ph 


> 




o 




C5 





ci 

QJ 




•43 
g 
g 

to C 

g ^ 

O g 

g o 
o o 
g o 

oil 

(-i o 



t 4^ 

^ o 
O 

g 2 

o 

^ g 

2 £ 



to o 

g-g 



a *h 



O 

•4-J 

o 
(4 



u 



ft o 



E o 

2 g iL 

U C5 g 

£ § O 
~R 

f o 

.S 2 ° 
o 



g 
S 

g 

^ g 

to g 

° cT 
g to 

pg Cj 

g g; 



o 



o 
o 

I—* 

ci ^ 

S £ 

g^ 
O 



1 * 

g 



CO 



g 

g 



* I 

g 

o 

. g 
o o 



g 



^» CJ 

g 

g 



g V 

- ° S 



o 

CJ 



o 

CiMQ 

*^ 

tt * -r! 

-Hah 
g^ ^ 



g * 

g o 

o »g 

*g CJ 

g^ o 

o *- 

» ^ 

r> g 
ft > 

2 5 



g ^ o 

ft ^ 

O ^ Cj 
O g tt 

0 

g CJ 
hH ^ g 

g o£ 



g 



g 
ft 

CJ 

S5 



g *g 
E* tt 



t4 

^3 g 



g cj 
^ g 



g 0 

ft£ 
-tt O 
rc3 

O ft 

CJ 

g tt 

g tt 

tt s * 
ft S g 

rg *^ 



S tt 
g O 

£^ 

CO 

g'^ g 

S tt o 
Eh 



ci 
»-« 

o 
o 

ci 



CO 

1—4 

CO 



00 



10 

(Ml 

CO 



o 

r— < 

CO 



CO 



CO 
00 



00 



CO 



to o 
•2 O 

o cr 
U tt 
o 

It 

tt • 

g £ 

g^ O 
13 C3 t0 
ttOi 



CM 
CO 



Leading events in India and Europe 



211 



p -i 



r 




V - 



*■* ** 
C~ - 



***** • 
' * % — •* 

^ 

- — ■ — 

^ . ^ '7 



° E 
^ 



o 

o 

*» 
V 
> 

G . 
< >< 

AT* 
* c 
.* o 



* 



r j 




* -0 

* * 



9* * 

1> 



?5 



f/J 



CI 



Sr. 
»-* 

Ul 



1-1 



CI 



CI 

(7) 



o 

CO 

C/5 



1 



L 



•212 



Appendix C 



13 



FM 
O 

R 

125 

P 

525 



© 

4J 

© 
13 

To 
a 



0!? 

© 
t-t 

tD 

O 
U 

to 



CM 
CO 
CO 



CO 

co 

00 



6™ 

O #*-4 

r 7; © 

O to 
© 

4-2 

© . 

CD 

© 
W 

CO 

p 
o 

CO 



43 
F4 

to 



d 

o 

• 1-4 

to 
PS 



4-3 

CO 

P 



P 
O 

co en 

P +2 

© 



o 
o 



to 



CO 
© 

O 



© 

p 

Hi 

v to 
© 



Pi 



<=> o 



CO 
CO 



CO 
CO 



o 

CO 
CO 



CO 
CO 



CO 
CO 
CO 



o 

CO 
CO 



© 
4J 
o 

to 

d 



4J 

o 

'C 
o 



© 

*© 

to 

m 
© 



4J 

» I— I 



© « 

u p 

© 

O cj 

+3 F4 

> to 
% to 



13 

d 



d 
© 



d 



d b 

IS £0 

* e 

■4^ O 

CO 

F-t 43 

• I— ( 

to 



d <n 
F4 

O M 
• i— « 

-P O 

CO o 

^ Q 



« g 

O 

s 



CO f-H 



c |2 

o to 



II 

2 m 
to 



fx 

o 

H 



C3 O 

o ^> 

S 

o 

o ° 

•-3 

>> O CO 
& > O 

rt q g 

PR 



$ s * 

t4 S> o 

5 W 

" to 

K O 



to 



W 

^ 5 
o o 

„ c? o o 

IT o 



■S 

4-< 

CO 

o 



co H 



4J 



o 

CQ 

to 



p 

4^ 

4p=> 

W 



E.5 

a a 

o 



o 

+3 



0Q 

H 

f2i 

W 

"A 
P 



130 

> 

03 



a & 
O -TJ 

p 
d 



O 

4J 

to 
d 

4-3 

^— * 

O _T 

4^» G 
PS 

> 
© 

d 

• r-t 



c3 

o 
d 

O 



CO p 



O 



O 

O 



CO 



* 



40 

d 

C0 O 

d 

-.2 8 

o 

P o 

H 



>> o 

s 

CO 

xn 

d 
^ o 



tJ) 4^ 



to 



o 



5 5 



to 

o 

o 

o 



4-> 

p 
d 



c3 

P 

o 

4^3 



CO 4^ 

^d p 

CQ G 
O 



— < 4^» 



3 O C5 



4^» ci 



13 



g 



o 



CO 

o 

P w> 
,5 g 

S d 



4^> 
P 

d 

a 

CO 

d 

o 

p 

< 

o 

t-1 



d 

O 

O S 

d 

© 



CO 



c3 



CO 



M 4-> 

U 

4^> 

go 



o 
d 

© 

So 

s 

© © 

M 4-> 

to 
^ H o 



00 ^ 



o ^ 

© a 

co © 

© ^ 
© 

© 



cn 
© 



4-* . <~« ^r* 



to - 

Ph ^ 

CO 

d 

V-4 CS 

co 
© 

> 

© d 
H 



d 

S3 

o 



© 
13 

d 
© 

P 

07 



4^ 

CO O 
M 



© 

d 

© 

* 

o 
a 

© 
> 

o 
O 



© 



© 
d 

p 

© 



M 
O 

HS 



P 



«3 h 
© 

CO 

© 

O 
u v 
02 



p 

o 



* 



© 



CI 

CO 
CO 



CO 
CO 
CO 



CO 
CO 



CO 
CO 



o 

CO 
CO 



co 

GO 



CO 
CO 

CO 



o 

CO 
CO 



APPENDIX D. 

BlBLIOGRAFIIY. 

Adam, Rnw W. Reports on Vernacular Education in Bengal and Bchar, submitted 
to Government in 1835, I83G and 1838 : With a brief view of its past and 
present condition, by the Rnv. J. Long, Calcutta, 18G8. 

Arbuthnot, A- J. Selections from the Records of tho Madras Government, No. ii. 
— Papers relating to Public Instruction comprising a memorandum of the 
proceedings of the Madras Government in tho Department of Public 
Instruction with nn appendix containing all the moro important papers 
recorded on the subject. Madras, 18o5, 

Bengal ; Past and Present, Vol. viii, 1914. Calcutta, 1914. 

[Vazm 83-112. — * J IlWorv of the Calcutta Madrasa." Tag^ 130*138.— 1 Bonarcs Snn&l;rit 

Bitngal Presidency, Report on the Colleges and Schools for Native Education 

under the superintendence of the Gcnoral Committee of Public Instruction 

in Bcnpal, 1831, etc. Calcutta, 1832, etc. 
Boutros, F. An Inquiry into the System of Education most likely to bo generally 

popular and beneficial in Bchar and the Upper Provinces, Scrampore, 

1812. 

Cameron, C. II, An Address to Parliament on the duties of Great Britain to India, 
in respect of Education of the Natives and their official employment. London, 
1833. 

Calcutta Review 1815, Vol, iii. The early or exclusively oriental period of Govern- 
ment education in Bengal pp.211 — 2G3 # 1852, No, xxxiii. South oy's life 
ofDr, Bell, pp. J53*0G. 

Chapman, Pkiscilla. Hindoo Female Education. London, 1839. 

Durr, Dn* A, The Rev* Dr, DufTs Letters addressed to Lord Auckland on tho 
subject of Native Education in India with Jiis Lordship's Minute (for tho 
flnko of reference) prefixed. Calcutta, 181L 

East India Company — 
A. Report from tho Select Committee of tho House of Commons on the aftairs of 
the East India Company, IGth August 1832. Printed by order of the Ilon'blc 
Court of Directors, London, 1833, 

{ 213 ) 

2r 



214 



Appendix D 



East India Company — contd. 

B, Minutes of Evidence taken before the Select Committee on the affairs of the 

East India Company. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed, 
16th August, 1832. London, 1SZ2. 

C. Minutes of Evidence taken before the Select Committee on the affairs of the 

East India Company and also an appendix and index. Vol. i, Public. 
Ordered to be printed 20th August 1853. 

[Of these B and C are~the same.] 

Second Report from the Select Committee on Indian Territories. Ordered by 

the House of Lords to be printed. London, 1853. 
Fourth Report from the Select Committee on Indian Territories. Ordered by 

the House of Commons to be printed, 3rd June, 1853. London, 1853. 
Sixth Report from the Select Committee o£ Indian Territories. Ordered by the 
House of Commons to be printed, 8th August, 1853. London, 1853. 
Eraser, J. N. Deccan College : a retrospect. Poona, 1902. 
The Friend of India, 1818-23. (Monthly series) — 
A brief account of the various Institutions at the Presidency of Fort William 
for the advancement of Knowledge and Religion. Vol. i, 1818, pp. 27-39 ; 
131-137 ; 188-195. 

On the state of education in the city of Delhi. Vol. i, 1818, pp. 251-252. 
Society for Schools recently formed at Dacca. Vol. i. 1818, pp. 299-300. 
First report of the Calcutta School Book Society. Vol. ii, 1819, pp. 143-151. 
Roebuck's Annals of the College of Fort William. Vol. ii, 1819, pp. 294-300. 
Letter respecting the operations of the Calcutta School Society. Vol. ii, 1819, 
pp. 405-419. 

Proceedings of the second annual general meeting of the Calcutta School Book 

Society. Vol. ii, 1819, pp. 443-449. 
Sceond Report of the Calcutta School Society. Vol. iv, 1821, pp. 187-192. 
Proceedings of the fourth annual general meeting of the Calcutta School Book 

Society. Vol. iv, 1821, pp. 278-284,and 313-317. v 
Memoir of Juynarayun Ghosal. Vol. v, 1822, pp. 224-233. 
Female Education in India. Vol. v, 1822, pp. 286-288. 
!%dras School Book Society. Vol. v, 1822, pp. 343-344. 
Benevolent Institution, Calcutta. Vol. vi, pp. 28-32. 
Native Female Education. Vol.'vi, 1823, pp. 127 and 319 and 380. 
The Fbiend of India, 1820-26. (Quarterly Series) — 
On Female Education in India. Vol. ii, 1822, pp. 1-40. 

The History, design and present state of the Religious, Benevolent and Charitable 
Institutions founded by the British in Calcutta and its vicinity. By Charlos 
Lushington May 1825, pp. 110-138. 



Bibliography 215 

^Che Friend of India, 1838-39. (Weekly)— 
Education, January 18th, 1838, pp< 17-20, 
Education. Marcli 8th, 1838, pp. 92-93. 
Committee of Public Instruction. Marcli 29th, 1838, p. 131. 
Committee of Public Instruction. April 5th, 1838, p. 145, 
Committee of Public Instruction, April 19th, 1838, p. 179. 
Third Report on the state of Education in Bengal (by W. Adam). May 24th, 

1838, pp. 259-260 ; 270-271. 
Mr. Adam's Report on the state of Education in Bengal, Second notice. May 

31st, 1838, pp. 276-277. 
Mr. Adam's Education Report — Concluding notice. June 7th, 1838, pp. 293-295. 
Judicial Education (This is a letter from the Committee of Public Instruction, 

dated February 27th, 1838, to Government). June 14th, 1838, pp. 314-316. 
Education Committee, August 2nd, 1838, pp* 419420. 
The Education Committee. October 4th, 1838, p. 563. 
Tho Education Committee. January 31st, 1839, pp. 66-67. 
The Agra School Book Society. February 21st, 1839, p. 113. 
Trevelyan on tho Education of the People of India — March 21st, 1839, pp. 

178-180. 

Trevelyan on the Education of the People of India — March 28th, 1839, pp. 
194495. 

Trovelyan on the Education of the People of India. April 4th, 1839, pp. 209-211. 
First Report of the General Assembly's Institution at Madras. May 2nd, 1839, 
pp. 277*278. 

The Education Committee. September 5th, 1839, pp. 563-564. 
Hindu Female Education ; by Priscilla Chapman. November 21st, 1839, pp. 
738-739. 

Hodgson, B. H. Miscellaneous Essays relating to Indian subjects. London,, 
1880. 

[Volumo ii, sootion xiv, Prc-emiaonco of tho Vernaculars j or tho Anglicists answered ; being 
four letters on tho Education of tho people of India. Letter i, dated August 1835 ; letter ii, Soptombor 
1835; letter iii f Nopal, July 1837 ; letter iv, April 1843 ; lottor v, Darjcoling, March 6th, 1848 ; letter 
vi, Darjooling, 28 tit March, 1848. These Iottora wore publishod under tho Bignaturo of Junius, soo 
page 310.] 

Holcomb, Helen H. Men of might in India Missions. London, 1901. 

Hough, J. Revd. Tho History of Christianity in India, 4 Vols, London, 183945, 

Howell, A, P. Education in British India, prior to 1854 and in 1870-71* Calcutta, 
1872. 

Howells, G. and Underwood, A. C. Tho Story of Serampore and its College, 
Serampore, 1918. 

2f2 



216 Appendix T> 

Junius. Two letters on the Education of the peoples of India. Serampore, 1835. 

Kaye, J. W. Christianity in India: an historical narrative. ^London, 1859. ' 

Keay, F. E. Ancient Indian Education. An inquiry into its origin, development, 
and ideals. London, 1918'. 

Kerr, J. (Principal of Eooglily College)- -A Review of Public Instruction in 
the Bengal Presidency from 1835 to 1851. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1853. 

Law, Narendra Nath. Promotion of Learning in India by early European settlers 
(up to about 1800 A.D.). With an introduction by the^en. W. K. 
Krminger. London, 1915. 

Mahmood, Syed. A History of English Education in India, 1781 to 1893. Aligarh, 
1895. 

Martin, M. History, antiquities topography and statistics of Eastern India; 
comprising the districts of Behar, Shahabad, Bhagulpoor, Goruckpoor, 
Dinagpore, Puraniya, Rungpoor and Assam, etc. 3. vols. London, 1838. "' 

[An instructive account of Classical Education in Western Bengal between A. D) 1807 and 1814 its 
contained in vol. i, 134f, 485ff : vol. ii, lOlff, 428ff, 7030" : vol. iii, 12811.] 

Mazumder, M. N. A history of Education in India. London, 1916. 
Memorials of Old Haileybury College, London, 1894. 

Nicholls, G. Sketch of the Rise and Progress of the Benares Patshalla or Sanskrit 
College forming the Sanskrit Department of the Benares College. Allahabad, 
1907. 

Norton, G. Native Education in India, comprising ,a review of its state and pro- 
gress within the Presidency of Madras. Madras, 1848. 

Penny, F., Revd. The Church in Madras : being the history of the Ecclesisastical 
and missionary action of the East India Company in the Presidency of Madras 
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 2 vols. London, 1904. 

Rice, L. Report on Education in Coorg, 1834-82. Calcutta, 1884. 

Roebuck, Captain T. Annals of the College of Port William, from the period of 

its foundation by His Excellency the Marquis of Wellesley on the 4th May 

1800 to the present time. Calcutta, 1819. 
Satthianadhan, S. History of Education in the Madras Presidency. Madras, 

1894. 

Sykes, Colonel. Statistics of the Educational Institutions of the East India 

Company in India. Calcutta, 1844. 
Thomas, P. W. The History and Prosp ects of British Educaion in India. London, 

1891. 

Thornton, R. Memoir on the Statistics of Indigenous Education within tho 
North-Westem Provinces of the Bengal Presidency. Calcutta, 1850. 



t 



Bibliography 217 

Trevelyax, & E. On the Education of tlio pooplo of India. Calcutta, 1838. 

[An Lwtrnct (chapter vh) from tho %vork wns published in the Fourth Report of the Select Committee 
on Indian Territories, 1853, p, 25Gf/J 

Ward, W, Letter to the Eight Hon'blo J. CL Villiers, on the Education of the 
Natives of India : to which arc added an account of Hindoo Widows, recently 
burnt alive in Bengal ; and also some extracts from the reports of the Native 
Schools, published by the Sorampore Missionaries. London, 1820. 

Woodrow, IL Macaulay'fi Minutes on Education in India written in the years 
„ 1835, 183G and 1837 and now first collected from records in the Department 
of Public Instruction. Calcutta, 18G2. 



INDEX. 



Accounts : 29, 36, 71 seq., 140, 148, 151, see ateo Finance, and grants, 
Act of 1S13 : 18, 19, 22, 110, 118, 135, 136, 
Adam, W. : 3, 46, 47, 143, 148, 152, 153, 15S, 215. 
Adamson, Dr. J. : 183. 
Agra College : 148, 151, 185. 

Ain4-Akbari : 2. ^ 

Ajmor Schools : 172, 186. 

Akbar:l,2. 

Allahabad School : 186. 

American Missionary School : 201, 

Amherst, Lord : 80, 145. 

Anglicists : 30, 77, 102 seq. 

Anglo-Indian College, Calcutta : 78, 171, 183. 

Apparatus for science teaching : 79. 

Arbuthnot, A. J, : 102, 213. 

Arbuthnot, G. : 33. 

Arcot : 75, 100. 

Arithmetic : 67, 97, 180, 

Astrology : 101. 

Astronomy : 174, 175, 189. 

Auckland^Lord : 131, 143, 147 ; Minutes by, 147, 148 *cg. 

Bayley, W. B. : 13, 57, 91, 9S. 

Barcilly : 26, ISO, 193. 

Barnapore School : 191. 

Boll, Dr. : 23, 199. 

Bollary : 65 scq. 

Benarc3 Charity School : 187. 

Benares English School : 187, 

Benares Sanskrit College : 7, 10-12, 20, 27, 31, 33 scq. 7 77, 79, 94, 116, 186. 

Benevolent Institution, Calcutta : 6, 185, 214. 

Bcntinck, Lord W. : 102, 117, 130, 132, 133, 146. 

Bhagalpur School : 21, 71, 187. 

Bhour : 20. 

Bhowaniporo : 184, 

Biaspur: 187. 

Birbhum : 187. 

Birch, Capt. : 142. 

Bishop's College, Calcutta : 78. 

Blcwitt, R.: 190. 

Bombay Native School Book and School Society : 6. 
Bombay Society for promoting education : 45, 199. 
Bombay system : 153, 157, 102, 169, 175, 197-201. 
Books Depository : 141, 142, 177. 

( 219 } 



220 



Books, printmcof * 114, 110, 120, 131, 130, 140, 141, 142, 177, 100. 

Books printed : 174, 177, 185, 1D3. 

Boyd, Mrs. E. : 197. 

BridRoV^^m ; 140, 141. 

Brooke, T. : 31 , 32, 33. 

Bunlnran : 187. 

Calcutta Benevolent Institution ; C, 180, 214. 
Cnlruttn Cfmrity School : 181. 
Calcutta College Buildings t 80-90. 
Cnlcutt.i Free School Society : 0, 184. 
Calcutta Lndio?' School : 185. 

Calcutta MndmMit : 7,0.21,30,30,72,91, 103,112, 114,110, 119, 124, 128, 133, 171, 1S2. 
Calcutta Medical Collcpc : 107. » 
Cntcutt.n Minion CoIIcrc : 181. 

Calcutta Snmkrit College : 39 srq t , 79, S7, 89, 1 10, 133, 14G, 183. 
Calcutta School Book Society : 0, 45, 50. 70, 185, 214. 
Calcutta School Society : 4G, 50, 153, 185, 214. 
• Calcuttn Vidyalyn : 18, 00, 171, 183, 192. 
Campbell, A, D. : 40, 40, 05 stq„ 195. 
Camoron, C. IL : 98, 102, 130, 213. 
Candy, Capt. : 109, 178. 
Carey, J. : 0, ISO. 
Carey, Dr. W. : 4, 0, 185. 
Cawnpore Free School : 188, 
Chaplin, Mr. : 198. 
Charter of 1093 : 3 
Charter ofl 793: 17. 

Charter of 1813 : 18, 22, 107, 110, 119, 135, 130. 
Chimmrah School'?: 45, 71, 172, 188. 

Chittagong Ma dm tun : 188. 

Colcbrookc, H. T. : 21, 30, 

College Hoard, Madma : 105. 

College at Fort William : 32, 33, 38, 214. 

Colvin, J # It, : 103* 105, 131, 144, 148, 155, 170 *r$. 

Committee of Public Instruction {tee General Commit too). 

Committee of Public Instruction, Madras : 70, 195. 

Constantino, Mr, ; 184. 

Corrie, Rev. D* : 187. 

Crocker's Land Surveying : 140. 

Cmldalorc :45, 101, * ' 

Cuddapah : 104. 

Dacca Schools; 141, 188, 

Danish Settlements: 4, 5. 

Decay of learning : 10, 47, 74* 

Dcccan College, Poona : 7, 17S, 10A 

Delhi: 7, 13-15, 52, 188, 180, 214. 

Delhi College: 110, 151, 1S8. 

Delhi Madrassa : 189, 

Dhuksna : 7, 198, 



In <tcx , 221 

Poveton, CaptAln : G. 

I>ufT, Dr, A. * 7S, J 47, 

Duncan, J, : 7 # 10, 31 , 34, 3G, ISO. 

Eart India College— set Hnileybury, 

Cart Indii Company Act of 1S13: is, 10, 22, 110, 118, 133, 130j 

Select Committee on : 33, 8I t 181, 
Egypt. Analogy of: 107, 118* 
Education Society, Bombay: 177 f 197, 
Elpbtrvrtone, Eord : C 
i:il»l>m*lonc, M. : 4S, 175, 197, IDS. 
Elphint.*onc pmfe*nowbipi : 107. 
EmJovmrntfl: 105. 

Engineering College, Bombay: 76, 197. 
Knctiih iducatJon : 62, 77 *tq., 130, 131 stq., I5S, 171, 175. 
Knptiili hnctMpc : 43, 01, 103, 101, 110, 117, 121, 143, ICO, 170, 170. 
KngltAh ni medium : 10, 82, 83 ttq., 1 67, 170. 

Kndhfa. tracking of : 115, 121, 12S, 132 *<q„ 137, Ml, 142, 143, 141, 151, 181. 
Eta watt £c»ooh : 100. 
Expenditure, 1813-1830: 20. 
Eurlitl: OS, 07, 152. 

European lite raturc and jscienco ; 70, SO, 04, 101. 
raritb, Mr. : 40, 177, 200. 
IVn :74, 123, 124, 171, 105, 100. 
1VW. Lieut.: 32, 1S7. 

Education : 185. 
Eitwnce : 20, 30, 71 ftq., 140, 143, 161. 
Fin-went Intimate for 1835 : 1 10. 
Fi^her'n memoir: 3, 40, 181 wj. 
Earl William Gillepc : 32, 33. 
Tort St. George Srr Madras. 
I*ni"T, \V. : 7, 13, 52, HO. 
(JaLmrw, Mr. : 187. 
(Janpndlnr, Pandit: 03, 185. 

General Committee ot Public Instruction, Bengal : 15, 40, 40, 53, 5-1. 01, 60, SO, 86, 03, 102, 104, 

105, 132, 130, 1 12, 160, ion, 107, ICS, 172, 184, 180, 188, 180, 100, 102, 215. 
Gerard, Dr. : 52, 100. 
Grant, C. J 10, 17, 18, 77, 81, 142. 
Grant, Dr. : 40, 112. 

Grant* : 18, 20. 22, 20, 48, 61, 63, 70, 71, 145, 143, 161, 182 «tq. S<t alto Titiance. 

Hnilpybury t 33, 38. 

Ifnmtrpur: 100. 

Hans lia vict : 0, 78, 01, 153. 

ICnrlngton, .T. 1!.: 61, 57, 70, 01,03. 

Unfiling, Marqufo of i 45. 

Hunting", Warren: 7, 110, 182. 

HcIkt, Hilltop: 187. 

llijli MfltlniBta: HK). 

Hill Territory : 62, 100. 

Hindoo College, Calcutta : 60, 72, 78, 80, 00, 01, 117, 107, 171, 183, 

2 a 



222 



Index 



Hodgson, B. : 156, 158, 100, 215. 
HoogUy Imambara X 190. 
Hooper's Vade Mccum: 140* 
Hough, Bevd. : 104* 

Howell, A. P. : 2, 7, 17, 45, 53, 78, 80, 215. 

Hutton's Mathematics : 42, 140. 

Imambarah, Hooghly : 190. 

Inayah : 141. 

Inspection : 20, 108. 

Irvine, Captain F. : 182. 

Jainarain Ghosal : 187, 214. 

Jaunpore : 21, 190. 

Jervis, Lieut. : 197, 200. 

Jones, Sir W. : 207. 

Kali Shanker Ghosal: 187, 193. 

Kerr, J.: 78, 110. 

Kidderporo: 184. 

Kiernander, Revel- : 45, 194. 

Ladies' School, Calcutta: 185, 

Lancasterian plan of instruction : 15, G9 f 185, 180, 188, 190, 194, 199. t 

Larkins, J. P. : 57, 91, 98, 

Law : 30, 31, 40, 42, 97, 114, 128, 141, 143. 

Length of school life : 00, 

Libraries: - 21, 108, 182. 

Lithography : 201. 

Local Agents, letter to : 40, 49, 09. 

Logic : 40, 42. ' • _ 

Lumsdcn, Dr. M. : 3G, 55, 182, 192. 

Macaulay, T. B. : 17, 102, 130, 133, 137, 138, 139, 142 ; Minute by, 107 ecq.; criticism thereon 

117 scq* 9 132 ; notes on Prinsep's minute, 117 stq. 
Mackenzio, Holt : 49, 54, 57, sc ff., 91, 98, 192. 
Macnaghtcn, W. H. : 100, 129, 134, 135. 
Madras : 3, 40, 52, 05 scg., 73 tcg. t 17S-179, 194 seq. 
Madras School Boole Society : 74, 75, 70, 214. 
Madras School Society : 195. 

Madrassa : Calcutta, 21,30, 30, 72, 79, 94, 103, 112, 114, 119, 182 ; Chittagong, 1SS ; Delhi, 189 ; 

Hijli, 190. 
Mahabharata : 07, HO. 
Mainpuri : 188, 190. f 
Malabar system of tuition : 199. 
Malcolm, Sir J, : 143, 144, 177. 
Manu : 1, 12. 

Marshman, J. : 4, 45. 1 
Martin, W. B. : 57, 98. 
Mass education : 45 seq> 
Mathematics : 40, 42, 174. 
May, R. : 45, 188. 

Medical Schools : Bombay, 78, 197 ; Calcutta, 78, 107, 183, 184. 
Medicine % 40, 43. 



Index 223 

Met- rat : 100. 

Minute* : by I/ini Auckland. 147, 148 ; T. Brooke, 33 ; Warren Hastings, 7 ; T. Ik Macaulay 

107 ; Lnrx! Minto, 10 ; Lord Moira, 21 ; SSrT. Munro, 73 ; H. T. Priiurcn, 103, 134. 
Minto, Wl : 17, 10, 1R7, 101. 

Mi"Moiiftty rntrrpri'e : 3, 4-0. 

Milton Collcfc, VtfruUn : 1ST 

MoitCi, : 19, 24, 27 40, 47, 4s?, 77 ; minute by, 24. 

Monitors; oo, 07, 

MoonkMib-wl.: 100. 
Morri*on. Ok": 137, I3<k 
MuiiMttl-Diti : S, 30, 152. 

Monro, h'ir T. : 40, 47, 40, f/0, M, 73. 104, 105 ; minute by, 73. 
Null's : 20. 70. 101 ; prat**"*) eoHrtv fit, 03. 05, 101. 
Nn^[ir>tT : 101. 

* Native Sck'Mil IV>ol: and Scbool Socirtv, TJomb.iv : 199, 201. 
>T,-\tirc .^VIkviI Km'rty of South KonLm : I0h\ 

Nickels r;. : in, 33," 210. 

Nv.n, 1; 42, 101, 101. 

'riniinv.f i>n tht Ftn'.t of Ft^itt'j, <■/<*. : 10, 81. 
Oo);tr?!«uy. Sir 1>. : Ik 
OnVfttftl hoaU: 114. 13.% 140. UU 

Ori( nUl Irmiinp : 02, 07. 00, 105, 100, 122, Ifin, l.W, it }n«niu 

'Or^tit.iliTjt *: 30,77, 100, 117 132 erq. 

r,i<*kf!i!)im, Mr. : 13*>. 

r.tJ/»«jrotfflh J 101. 

IV r>inn <ii court hnpi.-i!^ : I33. 

PjMi!j'»jjH of fimlMHi • 113, 12.". 131, 13*, 143, 145. 

PhUo'ophtril flp{i"tr.v{?i" : 70, 80. 

PoHry: r,s, 02, 07, 1<H«. 

Poon.i Collrpe : 17K, JOS. 

Prv .ub>nry Col(*T<\ Calcutta : 78. 

Prir^, Unit. : 1^3. 

Prin-fp, II. T. : .">7,01, 102. J'W, 171 ; diary of, 132 ; mlmittfi by, 103, 131 ;n< to by, 117. 

Vriwrp, J. : 10(1, l7Jk 

Priv.it** erh'ttiU, <orttm! of: frs, 02. 

PtmWimnilfl : 00. 

Partus'}; 07, 174, 17.X 

lkni«lwW: 102. 

P.ajputMW : ISfS. 

ltam.iy.mn : 07. 

Bnm Molirm Koy, liaja : (5. f-.0, 08, 183 ; letter from, OS scy. 
Ilrtn^'pur: 102. 

Ile^inftitAl fWioofo : JJf-np.n!, 103 ; Bombay, 201 ; Mndniw, 100. 

Jtt«iilttioii XI of 1820: 11KJ. 

Jltllfrtaut neutrality: 4>0, 2», 11/J. 

Poficrt'on, Major: 200. 

llo^, Mr.: 137, J A3, 10 k 

Itu««in : ntiulofry of, 111, 122. 

Rynn, Sir K. : H8, 140, 142, 108. 



224 



Index 



St. Thomas' Mount : 194. 

Sanskrit language and literature : 24, 41, 79, 100, 108, 146, 183, el passim. 
Sanskrit College, Benares : 12, 20, 27, 31, 33 seq., 94, 186. 
Sanskrit College, Calcutta : 39, 79, 87, 183. 
Sanskrit students, petition of : 113, 125, 146. 
Scholarships : 11, 37, 44, 103, 123, 146, 147, 165, 166, 167. 

Science : decay of, 19 ; introduction of, 22, 94, 107 ; promotion of, 22, 107, teaching, 80, 85, 86, 

88, 105, 132, 142, 197. 
Science apparatus : 79, 89i „ 
School Book and School Society, Bombay : 6, 199. 
School Book Society, Calcutta : 6, 45, 76, 214. 
School Book Society, Madras : 74, 75, 76, 214. 
School Society, Calcutta : 45, 163, 185, 214. 
School Society, Madras : 196. 
Siddhantas: 152, 174, 175. 
Sehore : 174. 

Select Committee on the affairs of the East India Company, 1832 : 38, 181. 
Serampore : 4, 78. 

Shakespeare, H. : 57, 91, 98, 103, 106. 

Society for promoting the education of the poor, Bombay : 6, 45, 199. 
Statistics : Bengal, 172, 173 ; Bombay, 199, 200 ; -Madras, 73, 195. 
Stipends : 11, 37, 112, 113, 116, 123, 146, 147, 150, 171. 
Stirling, A. : 57, 91, 98. 

Sullivan, J. : 3, 4. ' 
Sunday School at the Mount : 194. 
Surat: 199, 200. 
Surgeemarree, Bungapore : 192. 

Sutherland, Captain : 197,201. j 
Sutherland, J. C. C. : 40, 57, 91, 98, 104, 142. 
Swarts, Revd.: 3, 45, 194. 
Sylhet Madrissa : 192. 
Tanjore : 4, 45, 194. 

Taylor, Dr. J. H. : 188, 189, 198, 199. ' 1 
Teachers, training of : 49, 50, 51, 74, 179, 195, 199. 
Tehsildari schools : 51, 75, 178, 196. * , 

Thomas, F. W. : 1, 216.^ 

Tinnevelly: 194. * " 4 - 

Tirhut : 20, 79 ; proposed college at, 191. *•» J 
Training of teachers : 49, 50, 51, 74, 179, 195. - r " ' 

Trevelyan, 6.: 98, 105, 142, 215. x 
Trichinopoly : 194, 196. 
Troyer, A. : 44. 
Tytler, Dr. J.: 40,' 183. 
Ujjain : 175. 
Vedanta : 40, 100. 

Vernacular as the medium : 121, 156, 162, 164, 175, 
Vernacular test-books : 114, 153, 156, 162, 164, 169, 177, 179. 

Vidyalya, Calcutta : 78, 171, 183, 192. \ 
Ward, W. : 4. 



Index 



225 



Wnnli-n, K. : 40, 143, 170, 191). 

\Ve<.t Scholarships : 1G!V 105. 

Wilberfotxe : 10, 17, 18, 

Wilfotxl Cajrt. : 34, 33, 30. 

Wilkia«on. L. : lR2 t IX, I5S, 174, IS3 

Williams Mr. : 200. 

WiJ'on, H. II. : 40, 55, 67, 71, 91, 9S, 17J. 1SU, 187. 
Woodrow, JL; 102,217. 



CALCUTTA 

SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INlttA 

8, HASTINGS STREET 



4 



it 

t 



t 



